Chapter 9: Behaviorism: Antecedent Influences

functionalism was maturing, while structuralism maintained a strong but no longer exclusive position.
The year 1913 brought a declaration of war, a deliberate break with both of these positions. A protest movement began that was intended to destroy the older points of view.
Its leader wanted no modification of the past, and no compromise with it. This revolutionary movement was called behaviorism, and it was promoted by the 35-year-old
American psychologist John B. Watson. Just 10 years earlier, Watson had received his
Ph.D. from James Rowland Angell at the University of Chicago, when it was the center
of functional psychology, one of the two movements Watson set out to smash.
The basic tenets of Watson’s behaviorism were simple, direct, and bold. He called for a
scientific psychology that dealt only with observable behavioral acts that could be described objectively in terms such as “stimulus” and “response.” Further, Watson’s psychology rejected all mentalistic concepts and terms. Words such as “image,” “sensation,”
“mind,” and “consciousness”—which had been carried over from the days of mental
philosophy—were meaningless for a science of behavior, so far as Watson was concerned.
Watson was particularly vehement in rejecting the concept of consciousness. He believed that consciousness had absolutely no value for behavioral psychology. Further, he
said that consciousness had “never been seen, touched, smelled, tasted, or moved. It is a
plain assumption just as unprovable as the old concept of the soul” (Watson & McDougall, 1929, p. 14). Therefore, introspection, which assumed the existence of conscious
processes, was irrelevant and of no use to a science of behavior.
These basic ideas of the behaviorist movement did not originate with Watson but had
been developing for some time in psychology and in biology. Like all founders, Watson
organized and promoted ideas and issues that already were acceptable to the intellectual
Zeitgeist. Consider, then, the major forces Watson effectively brought together to form
his system of behavioral psychology: the philosophical tradition of objectivism and
mechanism, animal psychology, and functional psychology.
The recognition of the need for greater objectivity in psychology has a long history. It
can be traced to Descartes, whose mechanistic explanations for the operations of the human body were among the initial steps toward an objective science. More important in the
history of objectivism is the French philosopher Auguste Comte (see Chapter 2), founder
of the movement known as positivism that emphasized positive knowledge (facts), the
truth of which was not debatable. According to Comte, the only valid knowledge is that
which is social in nature and objectively observable. These criteria rule out introspection,
which depends on a private individual consciousness and cannot be objectively observed.
By the early years of the twentieth century, positivism had become part of the scientific Zeitgeist. In his writings, Watson rarely discussed positivism, nor did most American psychologists of the day; there was no need to do so. According to one historian,
these psychologists “acted like positivists, even if they did not assume the label” (Logue,
1985, p. 149). Thus, by the time Watson set to work on his behaviorism, the objectivistic,
mechanistic, and materialistic influences were so pervasive that they led inevitably to a
new kind of psychology—one without consciousness, mind, or soul—one that focused
on only what could be seen, heard, or touched. The result was a science of behavior
that viewed human beings as machines.

The Influence of Animal Psychology
on Behaviorism
Watson offered a clear statement of the relationship between animal psychology and
behaviorism: behaviorism is a direct outgrowth of studies in animal behavior during the
first decade of the twentieth century (Watson, 1929, p. 327). Thus, we can say that the

The Influence of Animal Psychology on Behaviorism

193

most important antecedent of Watson’s program was animal psychology, which grew out
of evolutionary theory and led to attempts to demonstrate the existence of mind in lower
organisms and the continuity between animal and human minds.
We noted in Chapter 6 the work of George John Romanes and Conwy Lloyd Morgan,
two pioneers in animal psychology. With Morgan’s law of parsimony and his greater reliance on experimental instead of anecdotal techniques, animal psychology became more
objective, although consciousness remained its focus. The methodology was becoming
more objective, even though the subject matter was not.
In 1889, for example, Alfred Binet published The Psychic Life of Micro-Organisms, in
which he proposed that single-cell protozoa possess the ability to perceive and discriminate
between objects and to display behavior that has purpose. In 1908, Francis Darwin (son of
Charles Darwin) discussed the role of consciousness in plants. In the early years of animal
psychology in the United States, there was a continuing interest in the conscious processes
of animals. The influence of Romanes and Morgan persisted for quite some time.

Jacques Loeb (1859–1924)

Tropism: An involuntary forced movement.

Associative memory:
An association between stimulus and
response, taken to indicate evidence of
consciousness in
animals.

A significant step toward greater objectivity in animal psychology can be credited to Jacques
Loeb (1859–1924), a German physiologist and zoologist who liked to water his lawn whenever it rained. He worked at several institutions in the United States, including the University
of Chicago. Reacting against the anthropomorphic tradition and the method of introspection
by analogy, Loeb developed a theory of animal behavior based on the concept of tropism, an
involuntary forced movement. Loeb believed that an animal’s reaction to a stimulus is direct
and automatic. Thus, the behavioral response is said to be forced by the stimulus and does
not require any explanation in terms of the animal’s alleged consciousness.
Although Loeb’s work represented the most objective and mechanistic approach to
animal psychology of its time, Loeb had not been able to totally cast off the past. He
did not reject consciousness in animals (e.g., humans) that were high on the evolutionary
scale (Loeb, 1918). Loeb argued that animal consciousness was revealed by associative
memory; that is, the animals had learned to react to certain stimuli in a desirable way.
For example, when an animal responds to its name or reacts to a specific sound by going
repeatedly to the place where it receives food, this is evidence of some mental connection, an associative memory. So even in Loeb’s otherwise mechanistic approach, he still
invoked the idea of consciousness.
Watson took courses with Loeb at the University of Chicago and hoped to do research under his direction, showing a curiosity about Loeb’s mechanistic views. Angell,
along with the neurologist H. H. Donaldson, talked Watson out of this plan. They argued that Loeb was unsafe, a word open to interpretation but perhaps indicating disapproval of Loeb’s objectivism.

Archives of the History of American Psychology/
University of Akron

Rats, Ants, and the Animal Mind

ROBERT YERKES

By the beginning of the twentieth century, experimental animal psychologists were hard
at work. Robert Yerkes began animal studies in 1900 using a variety of animals, and his
research strengthened the position and influence of comparative psychology.
Also in 1900, the rat maze was introduced by Willard S. Small at Clark University
(see Figure 9.1), and the white rat and maze became a standard method for the study
of learning. Yet consciousness continued to intrude in animal psychology, even with the
white rat running the maze. In interpreting the rat’s behavior, Small used mentalistic
terms, writing about the rat’s ideas and images.
Although Small’s conclusions were more objective than those produced by Romanes’s
brand of anthropomorphizing, they, too, reflected a concern with mental processes and

194

Chapter 9: Behaviorism: Antecedent Influences

F I G U R E 9 . 1 The rat

maze. A hungry rat
placed in the maze is
allowed to wander freely
until it finds food.

elements. Even Watson, early in his career, fell under that influence. His doctoral dissertation, completed in 1903, was titled “Animal Education: The Psychical Development of
the White Rat” (italics added). As late as 1907 he was discussing the conscious experience of sensation in his rats.
In 1906, while a graduate student at the University of Chicago, Charles Henry Turner
(1867–1923) published an article titled “A Preliminary Note on Ant Behavior.” Watson
reviewed the paper in the prestigious journal Psychological Bulletin and praised it highly.
In his review, Watson used the word behavior, taken from Turner’s title. This may have
been the first time Watson used the word in print, although he had written it earlier in a
grant application (Cadwallader, 1984, 1987).
Turner, an African American, received his Ph.D. magna cum laude in 1907 from the
University of Chicago. Although his degree was in zoology, he published so much
research on comparative and animal studies in psychology journals that some psychologists claim him as one of their own. Recall, however, that jobs for minority
psychologists were scarce, so Turner’s teaching opportunities were limited. “Yet working
alone as a high school science teacher, he made important discoveries in the field of insect learning and behavior” (Abramson, 2009, p. 344).
By 1910, eight comparative psychology laboratories had been established; the earliest
were at Clark, Harvard, and the University of Chicago. Many other universities offered
courses in the field. Margaret Floy Washburn, who had been Titchener’s first doctoral
student (see Chapter 5), taught animal psychology at Cornell. Her book, The Animal
Mind (1908), was the first comparative psychology textbook published in the United
States.
Note the title of Washburn’s book: The Animal Mind. In her work, the attribution of
consciousness to animals persisted, as did the method of introspecting the animal mind
by analogy with the human mind. Washburn noted:

The Influence of Animal Psychology on Behaviorism

195

We are obliged to acknowledge that all psychic interpretation of animal behavior must
be on the analogy of human experience. We must be anthropomorphic in the notions
we form of what takes place in the mind of an animal. (1908, p. 88)
Although Washburn’s book was the most thorough treatment of animal psychology
research of its day, it also marked the end of an era. After it, no other text would use
the approach of inferring mental states from behavior:
The questions that had interested [Herbert] Spencer, Lloyd Morgan, and Yerkes went
out of fashion and mostly disappeared from the literature. Almost all subsequent textbooks in the field were behaviorist in orientation, and primarily concerned with the issues and problems of learning. (Demarest, 1987, p. 144)

On Becoming an Animal Psychologist
Whether dealing with mind or with behavior, it was not easy to be an animal psychologist. State legislators and university administrators, always concerned with funding, did
not consider the field to have any practical value. Harvard’s president saw “no future in
Yerkes’s brand of comparative psychology. It was smelly and expensive and seemed
to have no relation to practical public service” (Reed, 1987a, p. 94). Yerkes wrote that
he was
gently and tactfully advised … that educational psychology offered a broader and more
direct path to a professorship and to increased academic usefulness than did my special
field of comparative psychology, and that I might well consider effecting a change.
(1930/1961, pp. 390–391)
The students Yerkes trained in his laboratory sought jobs in applied fields because
they were unable to find employment in comparative psychology. Those who did secure
university positions knew they were the most expendable members of their psychology
departments. In times of financial hardship, animal psychologists were likely to be the
first to be fired.
Watson himself faced problems early in his career. “I am very hampered in my research at present,” he wrote to Yerkes. “We have absolutely no place to keep animals
and no funds to run the ‘menagerie’ if we had the place” (Watson, 1904, quoted in
O’Donnell, 1985, p. 190). In 1908 only six animal studies were published in psychology
journals, which accounted for only 4 percent of all the psychological research that year.
The following year, when Watson suggested to Yerkes that all the animal psychologists
meet for dinner during the APA convention, he knew they could be seated at one table;
there were only nine of them. In the 1910 edition of Cattell’s American Men of Science,
only six of the 218 psychologists listed claimed to be active in animal research. Career
prospects were poor, yet the field expanded because of the dedication of the few who
stayed with it.
In 1911, the Journal of Animal Behavior (later the Journal of Comparative Psychology)
began publication. In 1906, a lecture by the Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov was reprinted in the journal Science, introducing his work on animal psychology to the American audience. Yerkes and Sergius Morgulis, a Russian student, published a more detailed
account of Pavlov’s methodology and results in the Psychological Bulletin (1909).
Pavlov’s research supported an objective psychology, and Watson’s behaviorism in
particular. Thus, animal psychology became established and grew increasingly objective
in subject matter and methodology. That trend toward greater objectivity in the study of
animal behavior was strongly supported by events in Germany in 1904. That was the
year the government established a committee to examine Clever Hans’s powers and

196

Chapter 9: Behaviorism: Antecedent Influences

determine whether any deception or trickery was involved. The group included a circus
manager, a veterinarian, horse trainers, an aristocrat, the director of the Berlin Zoo, and
psychologist Carl Stumpf from the University of Berlin.

Was Hans Really Clever?
In September 1904, after a lengthy investigation, the committee concluded that Hans the
Wonder Horse was not receiving intentional signals or cues from his owner. No fraud,
no deceit. Stumpf was not completely satisfied, however. He was curious about how the
horse was able to respond correctly to so many kinds of questions. He assigned the problem to a graduate student, Oskar Pfungst, who approached the task in the careful manner of an experimental psychologist.
The horse had demonstrated that it could answer questions even when the trainer was
not present, so Pfungst designed an experiment to test this phenomenon. He formed two
groups of questioners, one composed of people who knew the answers to the questions
put to the horse, and another composed of people who did not know the answers. The
results showed that the horse answered correctly only when the questioners themselves
knew the answers. Obviously Hans was receiving information from whoever was questioning him, even when that person was a stranger.
After a series of well-controlled experiments, Pfungst concluded that Hans had been
unintentionally conditioned by his owner, von Osten. The horse would begin tapping his
hoof whenever he perceived the slightest downward movement of von Osten’s head.
When the correct number of taps had been made, von Osten’s head automatically
bobbed up and the horse would stop. Pfungst demonstrated that everyone—even people
who had never before been near a horse—made the same barely perceptible head gestures when speaking to the animal.
Thus, the psychologist demonstrated that Hans did not have a storehouse of knowledge. He had simply been trained to start tapping his hoof or to incline his head toward
an object whenever his questioner made a certain movement. And the horse had been
conditioned to stop tapping in response to the questioner’s opposite movement. Von Osten had reinforced Hans during the training period by giving him carrots and sugar
lumps when he made a correct response. As the training progressed, von Osten found
that he no longer had to reinforce every correct behavior, so he began to reward the
horse only occasionally. The behavioral psychologist B. F. Skinner would later demonstrate the great effectiveness of such partial or intermittent reinforcement in the conditioning process:
What did von Osten think of Pfungst’s report? The man was devastated! He felt abused,
exploited, and physically ill. But he directed his anger not at Pfungst, but at Hans who,
von Osten believed, had somehow deceived him. Von Osten said that the horse’s deceitful behavior had made him sick. And he had become very sick indeed with what the
physician diagnosed as cancer of the liver. (Candland, 1993, p. 135)
Von Osten never forgave Hans for his treachery. He put a curse on the horse, vowing that the animal would spend the rest of its days pulling hearses. Von Osten died
two years after Pfungst’s revelations, still maintaining that the ungrateful horse’s behavior was responsible for his illness. Clearly, he was still attributing intelligence to
Hans.
Clever Hans’s new owner, Hans Krall, a wealthy jeweler, put Hans and two other
horses on display for popular performances in which the horses tapped out answers to
questions. Their answers were always correct, and Krall called them the Wizard Horses.
They amazed audiences with their powers; they could even calculate the square root of
numbers, among other tricks (see Kressley-Mba, 2006). Apparently much of the public

Edward Lee Thorndike (1874–1949)

197

had not heard of or paid attention to Pfungst’s research showing that Hans’s alleged
powers were no mystery but were simply learned responses.
The case of Clever Hans illustrates the value and necessity of an experimental approach to the study of animal behavior. It made psychologists more skeptical of claims
of great feats of animal intelligence. However, it also showed that animals were capable
of learning and that they could be conditioned to modify their behavior. The experimental study of animal learning came to be seen as a more useful approach to the problem
than the earlier type of speculation about some alleged consciousness operating in an
animal’s mind. Pfungst’s experimental report about Clever Hans was reviewed by John
B. Watson for the Journal of Comparative Neurology and Psychology, and its conclusions
influenced Watson’s growing inclination to promote a psychology that would deal only
with behavior, not with consciousness (Watson, 1908).
Archives of the History of American Psychology/
University of Akron

Edward Lee Thorndike (1874–1949)

E. L. THORNDIKE

One of the most important researchers in the development of animal psychology,
Thorndike fashioned a mechanistic, objective learning theory that focused on overt behavior. Thorndike believed that psychology must study behavior, not mental elements
or conscious experiences, and thus he reinforced the trend toward greater objectivity
begun by the functionalists. He did not interpret learning subjectively but rather in
terms of concrete connections between stimuli and responses, although he did permit
some reference to consciousness and mental processes.
The works of Thorndike and Ivan Pavlov provide an example of independent simultaneous discovery. Thorndike developed his law of effect in 1898, and Pavlov proposed a
similar law of reinforcement in 1902.

Thorndike’s Life
Edward Lee Thorndike was one of the first American psychologists to receive all of his
education in the United States. It is significant that this was possible—that he did not
have to travel to Germany for graduate study—just two decades after the formal founding of psychology. His interest in psychology was awakened, as it was for so many
others, when he read William James’s The Principles of Psychology while an undergraduate at Wesleyan University in Middletown, Connecticut. Thorndike later studied under
James at Harvard and began his investigation of learning.
He had planned to conduct his research with children as subjects, but this was forbidden. The university administration was still sensitive about a scandal involving
charges that an anthropologist had loosened children’s clothing to take their body measurements. When Thorndike learned that he could not study children, he chose chicks
instead. He may have been inspired by the lectures given by Morgan describing his research with chicks.
Thorndike improvised mazes by stacking books on end and trained his chicks to run
through them. The story is told that Thorndike had difficulty finding a place to house
his chicks. His landlady refused to allow him to keep the birds in his bedroom, so he
asked William James for advice. James was unsuccessful in finding space in the laboratory or the university museum, so he took Thorndike and the chicks into the basement
of his home, to the delight of James’s children.
Thorndike did not complete his education at Harvard. Believing that a certain young
lady did not return his affection, he applied to James McKeen Cattell at Columbia University in order to get away from the Boston area. When Cattell offered him a fellowship,
Thorndike went to New York, taking with him his two best-trained chicks. He continued
his animal research at Columbia, working with cats and dogs in puzzle boxes of his own

198

Chapter 9: Behaviorism: Antecedent Influences

design. He was awarded his doctoral degree in 1898. His dissertation, “Animal Intelligence: An Experimental Study of the Associative Processes in Animals,” was published
in the Psychological Review and enjoys the distinction of being the first psychology
doctoral dissertation to use animal subjects (Galef, 1998). Thorndike later published
considerable subsequent research on associative learning in chicks, fish, cats, and
monkeys.
Fiercely ambitious and competitive, Thorndike wrote to his fiancée, “I’ve decided to
get to the top of the psychology heap in five years, teach ten more, and then quit”
(quoted in Boakes, 1984, p. 72). He did not remain an animal psychologist for long. He
admitted that he had no real interest in it but had stuck with it only to complete his
degree and establish a reputation. Animal psychology was not the field for someone
with an intense drive to succeed. As noted earlier, there were many more job opportunities in applied areas than in animal research.
Thorndike became an instructor in psychology at Teachers College of Columbia
University. There he worked with human subjects on problems of learning, adapting
his animal research techniques for children and young people (Beatty, 1998). He
branched out to educational psychology and mental testing, wrote several textbooks,
and in 1910 founded the Journal of Educational Psychology. He got to the top of the psychology heap in 1912 when he was elected president of the APA. Royalties from his tests
and textbooks made him wealthy, and by 1924 he boasted an income of nearly $70,000
a year, a tremendous sum at that time (Boakes, 1984).
Thorndike’s 50 years at Columbia are among the most productive ever recorded in
the history of psychology. His bibliography lists 507 items. Although he retired in 1939,
he continued to work until his death 10 years later.

Connectionism
Connectionism: Thorndike’s approach to
learning that was
based on connections
between situations and
responses.

Thorndike called his experimental approach to the study of association connectionism.
He wrote that if he were to analyze the human mind he would find
connections of varying strength between (a) situations, elements of situations, and compounds of situations, and (b) responses, readinesses to respond, facilitations, inhibitions,
and directions of responses. If all these could be completely inventoried, telling what the
man would think and do and what would satisfy and annoy him, in every conceivable
situation, it seems to me that nothing would be left out. … Learning is connecting. The
mind is man’s connection-system. (1931, p. 122)
This position was a direct extension of the older philosophical notion of association
(see Chapter 2), but with one significant difference. Instead of talking about associations
or connections between ideas, Thorndike was dealing with connections between objectively verifiable situations and responses.
Although Thorndike developed his theory within a more objective frame of reference,
he continued to invoke mental processes. He spoke of satisfaction, annoyance, and discomfort when discussing the behavior of his experimental animals, terms that are more
mentalistic than behavioristic. Thus, Thorndike retained the influence of Romanes and
Morgan. His objective analyses of animal behaviors often incorporated subjective judgments about the animal’s alleged conscious experiences.
We note that Thorndike, like Jacques Loeb, was not freely granting high levels of consciousness and intelligence to animals as extravagantly as Romanes had. You can see a
steady reduction in the importance of consciousness in animal psychology from its beginnings to Thorndike’s time, along with an increasing use of the experimental method
to study behavior.

Edward Lee Thorndike (1874–1949)

199

In spite of the mentalistic tinge to Thorndike’s work, his approach was indeed in the
mechanistic tradition. He argued that behavior must be reduced to its simplest elements:
the stimulus–response units. He shared with the structuralists and the British empiricists
a mechanistic, analytical, and atomistic point of view. Stimulus–response units are the
elements of behavior (not of consciousness) and are the building blocks from which
more complex behaviors are compounded.

The Puzzle Box
Thorndike designed and built crude puzzle boxes out of old crates and sticks, to be used
for his research on animal learning (see Figure 9.2). To escape from the box, the animal
had to learn to operate a latch. Thorndike traced his idea for the puzzle box as an apparatus for studying learning to the anecdotal reports of Romanes and Morgan that described the way cats and dogs opened latches on gates.
In one series of experiments, Thorndike placed a food-deprived cat in the slatted box.
Food was left outside the box as a reward for escaping. The cat had to pull a lever or
chain, and sometimes engage in several acts in succession, to unfasten the latches and
open the door. At first the cat displayed random behaviors, poking, sniffing, and clawing
to get at the food. Eventually the cat executed the correct behavior and unlatched the
door. During the first trial, that behavior occurred by accident. On subsequent trials,
the random behaviors were displayed less frequently until learning was complete. Then
the cat would exhibit the appropriate behavior as soon as it was placed in the box.
To record his data, Thorndike used quantitative measures of learning. One technique
was to log the number of wrong behaviors, the actions that did not lead to escape. Over
a series of trials the number of these behaviors diminished. Another technique was to
record the elapsed time from the moment the cat was placed in the box until it succeeded in escaping. As learning took place, this time period decreased.
Thorndike wrote about “stamping in” and “stamping out” a response tendency by its
favorable or unfavorable consequences. Unsuccessful response tendencies that did nothing to get the cat out of the box tended to disappear, to be stamped out over a number of
F I G U R E 9. 2 Thorndike’s puzzle box.

200

Chapter 9: Behaviorism: Antecedent Influences

Trial-and-error
learning: Learning
based on the repetition
of response tendencies
that lead to success.
Law of effect: Acts that
produce satisfaction in
a given situation become associated with
that situation; when the
situation recurs, the
act is likely to recur.
Law of exercise: The
more an act or
response is used in a
given situation, the
more strongly the act
becomes associated
with that situation.

trials. Response tendencies that led to success were stamped in after a number of trials.
This kind of learning has come to be known as trial-and-error learning, although
Thorndike preferred to call it trial-and-accidental success.

Laws of Learning
Thorndike formally presented his ideas about the stamping in or stamping out of a response tendency as the law of effect:
Any act which in a given situation produces satisfaction becomes associated with that
situation, so that when the situation recurs the act is more likely than before to recur
also. Conversely, any act which in a given situation produces discomfort becomes disassociated from that situation, so that when the situation recurs the act is less likely than
before to recur. (1905, p. 203)
A companion law—the law of exercise or the law of use and disuse—states that any
response made in a particular situation becomes associated with that situation. The more
the response is used in the situation, the more strongly it becomes associated with it.
Conversely, prolonged disuse of the response tends to weaken the association.
In other words, simply repeating a response in a given situation tends to strengthen
that response. Further research persuaded Thorndike that the reward consequences of a
response (a situation that produces satisfaction) are more effective than mere repetition
of the response.
Through an extensive research program using human subjects, Thorndike later reexamined the law of effect. The results revealed that rewarding a response did indeed
strengthen it, but punishing a response did not produce a comparable negative effect.
He revised his views to place greater emphasis on reward than on punishment.

Comment
Thorndike’s investigations of human and animal learning are among the most significant
research programs in the history of psychology. His work heralded the rise of learning theory to prominence in American psychology, and the objective spirit in which he conducted
his research was an important contribution to behaviorism. Watson wrote that Thorndike’s
research laid the foundation for behaviorism. Ivan Pavlov also paid tribute to Thorndike:

Archives of the History of American Psychology/
University of Akron

Some years after the beginning of the work with our new method I learned that somewhat
similar experiments had been performed in America, and indeed not by physiologists but
by psychologists. I must acknowledge that the honor of having made the first steps along
this path belongs to E.L. Thorndike. By two or three years his experiments preceded ours
and his book must be considered a classic, both for its bold outlook on an immense task
and for the accuracy of its results. (Pavlov, 1928, quoted in Jonçich, 1968, pp. 415–416)

Ivan Petrovitch Pavlov (1849–1936)
Ivan Pavlov’s work on learning helped to shift associationism from its traditional emphasis on subjective ideas to objective and quantifiable physiological events such as glandular secretions and muscular movements. As a result, Pavlov’s work provided Watson
with a method for studying behavior and for attempting to control and modify it.

Pavlov’s Life
IVAN PAVLOV

Ivan Pavlov was born in the town of Ryazan, in central Russia, the eldest of 11 children
of a village priest. His position in such a large family required him to develop at an early

Ivan Petrovitch Pavlov (1849–1936)

201

age a sense of responsibility and the drive to work hard. He retained these characteristics
all his life. He was unable to attend school for several years because of head injuries sustained in an accident at the age of seven, so his father tutored him at home. Pavlov entered the theological seminary intending to prepare for the priesthood, but he changed
his mind after reading about Darwin’s theory. He was so determined to attend the university at St. Petersburg to study animal physiology that he walked there, a distance of
several hundred miles.
With his university training, Pavlov became part of the intelligentsia, an emerging
class in Russian society that was distinct from the other classes: the aristocracy and the
peasantry. One historian noted that Pavlov was
too well-educated and too intelligent for the peasantry from which he came, but too
common and too poor for the aristocracy into which he could never rise. These social
conditions often produced an especially dedicated intellectual, one whose entire life was
centered on the intellectual pursuits that justified his existence. And so it was with
Pavlov, whose almost fanatic devotion to pure science and to experimental research
was supported by the energy and simplicity of a Russian peasant. (Miller, 1962, p. 177)
Pavlov obtained his degree in 1875 and began medical training, not to practice as a
physician but in the hope of pursuing a career in physiological research. He studied in
Germany for two years, then returned to St. Petersburg to spend several years as a laboratory research assistant.
Pavlov was totally dedicated to his research. He refused to be distracted by practical
matters such as salary, clothing, or living conditions. His wife, Sara, whom he married in
1881, devoted herself to protecting him from mundane matters. They made a pact early
in their marriage, agreeing that she would take care of everyday concerns and allow
nothing to interfere with his work. In return, Pavlov promised never to drink or play
cards and to socialize only on Saturday and Sunday evenings. Otherwise he adhered to
a rigorous schedule, working seven days a week from September to May and spending
summers in the countryside.
His indifference to finances is illustrated by the story that Sara often had to remind
him to collect his pay. She also said he could not be trusted to buy clothes for himself.
Once, when he was in his seventies, Pavlov was riding the streetcar to his laboratory.
Being impetuous, he jumped off before it stopped, fell, and broke his leg. “A woman
standing near saw it and said, ‘My, here is a man of genius, but he doesn’t know how
to get off a streetcar without breaking his leg’ ” (Gantt, 1979, p. 28).
The Pavlov family lived in poverty until 1890 when, at the age of 41, Pavlov received an
appointment as professor of pharmacology at St. Petersburg’s Military Medical Academy. A
few years earlier, while he was preparing his doctoral dissertation, their first child was born.
The doctor said that the frail infant would probably not survive unless mother and child
could rest in the country. Pavlov was finally able to borrow enough money for the journey,
but not in time, and the child died. When the next child arrived, the family lived with relatives while Pavlov slept on a cot in his laboratory because they could not afford an apartment.
A group of Pavlov’s students, knowing of his financial difficulties, gave him money on
the pretext of paying for lectures they asked him to present. Pavlov kept none of the
money for himself, spending the funds instead on dogs for his laboratory. He never
seemed bothered by these hardships. They reportedly caused him no concern.
Although laboratory research was Pavlov’s overriding interest, he rarely conducted experiments himself. Instead, he usually supervised the efforts of others. From 1897
to 1936, nearly 150 researchers worked under Pavlov’s direction, producing more than
500 scientific papers. One student wrote that the “entire laboratory worked like the
mechanism of a watch” (Todes, 2002, p. 107).

202

Chapter 9: Behaviorism: Antecedent Influences

Pavlov incorporated [the researchers] into a factory-like system that essentially used
them as his own hands and eyes: He assigned them a specific topic, provided them
with a suitably equipped dog technology, supervised … their research, interpreted their
results, and closely edited their written products. (Todes, 1997, p. 948)
Pavlov’s temper was famous. He was given to explosive tirades at work, often directed
at his research assistants. During the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, he berated an assistant for being 10 minutes late. Gunfire in the streets was no excuse and should not be
permitted to interfere with laboratory work. Usually these emotional outbursts were
quickly forgotten. His researchers knew what was expected—because Pavlov never hesitated to tell them. He was honest and direct, if not always considerate, in dealing with
other people. He was well aware of his volatile nature. One laboratory worker who could
no longer tolerate the insults asked to be relieved of his duties. “Pavlov replied that his
abusive behavior was just a habit … it was not of itself a sufficient reason to quit the
laboratory” (quoted in Windholz, 1990, p. 68). Any failure of an experiment would
make Pavlov depressed, but a success brought such joy that he would congratulate not
only his assistants but also the dogs.
He tried to be as humane as possible with the dogs and believed that the surgical procedures to which they were subjected were unfortunate but unavoidable in scientific
research:
We must painfully acknowledge that precisely because of its great intellectual development, the best of man’s domesticated animals—the dog—most often becomes the victim
of physiological experiments. The dog is irreplaceable; moreover, it is extremely touching. It is almost a participant in the experiments conducted upon it, greatly facilitating
the success of the research by its understanding and compliance. (Pavlov, quoted in
Todes, 2002, p. 123)
A monument to a dog, an ornate fountain, was erected in 1935 on the grounds of
Pavlov’s research facility. “At the core is a pedestal with a large canine sitting on it with
bas-reliefs of laboratory scenes and quotations from Pavlov. Around the top are busts of
8 canines, water pouring from their mouths as they salute in salivation” (Johnson, 2008,
pp. 136–137).
Jersy Konorski, a psychologist from Poland who had worked at the laboratory, recalled that Pavlov’s students treated him like royalty. Konorski wrote that there was
clear jealousy among Pavlov’s pupils about who was closest to him. People boasted
when Pavlov spoke to them at some length … the attitude of Pavlov toward an
individual was the main factor determining the hierarchy within the group.
(1974, p. 193)
An American student, W. H. Gantt, who later translated Pavlov’s works into the
English language, wrote that when he first met Pavlov it was “a day he remembered all
his life” (quoted in Kosmachevskaya & Gromova, 2007, p. 303).
Pavlov was one of the few Russian scientists to allow women and Jews to study in his
laboratory. Any suggestion of anti-Semitism angered him. He had a good sense of humor
and knew how to enjoy a joke, even when it was played on him. During the ceremony at
which he received an honorary degree from Cambridge University, students sitting in the
balcony lowered a toy dog on a rope, dropping it into Pavlov’s lap. Pavlov kept the dog
by his desk in his apartment.
E. R. Hilgard, then a Ph.D. candidate at Yale University, heard Pavlov speak in 1929
at the Ninth International Congress of Psychology in New Haven, Connecticut. Pavlov
addressed the audience in Russian, pausing periodically to allow the translator to present

Ivan Petrovitch Pavlov (1849–1936)

203

Pavlov’s remarks in English. The translator later told Hilgard that “Pavlov would stop
and say, ‘You know all about this. You tell them about it. I’ll go ahead and tell them
something else’ ” (reported in Fowler, 1994, p. 3).
Pavlov’s relations with the government of the Soviet Union were difficult. He was
openly critical of the 1917 Russian Revolution and of the Soviet political and economic
system. He wrote protest letters to Joseph Stalin, the tyrannical dictator who killed and
exiled millions. Pavlov’s refusal to attend Soviet scientific meetings demonstrated his disapproval of the regime. Not until 1933 did he acknowledge that the Soviets had achieved
some success. Despite his attitude, Pavlov continued to receive generous research support
from the government and was allowed to conduct his research free of official interference
(see Zagrina, 2009).
Pavlov remained a scientist to the last. He was accustomed to practicing selfobservation whenever he was ill, and the day of his death was no exception. Weak from
pneumonia, he called in a physician and described his symptoms: “My brain is not working well, obsessive feelings and involuntary movements appear; mortification may be setting in.” He discussed his condition with the doctor for a while and then fell asleep. When
he awoke, Pavlov raised himself in bed and began to search for his clothes, with the same
restless energy he had shown all his life. “It is time to get up,” he exclaimed. “Help me,
I must dress!” And with that, he fell back on the pillows and died (Gantt, 1941, p. 35).

Conditioned Reflexes

Conditioned reflexes:
Reflexes that are conditional or dependent
on the formation of an
association or connection between stimulus and response.

During his distinguished career, Pavlov worked on three major problems. The first concerned the function of the nerves of the heart, and the second involved the primary digestive glands. His brilliant research on digestion won worldwide recognition and the
1904 Nobel Prize. His third research area, for which he occupies a prominent place in
the history of psychology, was the study of conditioned reflexes.
The notion of conditioned reflexes originated, as so many scientific breakthroughs
did, with an accidental discovery. In working on the digestive glands in dogs, Pavlov
used the method of surgical exposure to permit digestive secretions to be collected outside the body where they could be observed, measured, and recorded (Pavlov,
1927/1960). One aspect of this work dealt with the function of saliva, which the dogs
secreted involuntarily whenever food was placed in their mouths. Pavlov noticed that
sometimes saliva flowed even before the food was given. The dogs salivated at the sight
of the food or at the sound of the footsteps of the man who regularly fed them. The
unlearned response of salivation somehow had become connected with, or conditioned
to, stimuli previously associated with receiving food.

Psychic reflexes

These psychic reflexes, as Pavlov first called them, were aroused in
the laboratory dogs by stimuli other than the original one (i.e., the food). Pavlov reasoned that this reaction occurred because these other stimuli (such as the sight and
sounds of the attendant) had so often been related to feeding.
In accordance with the prevailing Zeitgeist in animal psychology—and like Thorndike, Loeb, and others before him—Pavlov focused initially on the mentalistic experiences of his laboratory animals. We can see this viewpoint in the term “psychic
reflexes,” his original term for conditioned reflexes. He wrote about the animals’ desires,
judgment, and will, interpreting the animals’ mental events in subjective and human
terms. In time, Pavlov dropped such mentalistic references in favor of a more objective,
descriptive approach:
At first in our psychical experiments … we conscientiously endeavored to explain our
results by imagining the subjective state of the animal. But nothing came of this except

204

Chapter 9: Behaviorism: Antecedent Influences

sterile controversy and individual views that could not be reconciled. And so we could
do nothing but conduct the research on a purely objective basis. (Pavlov, quoted in
Cuny, 1965, p. 65)
In the English translation of his classic book, Conditioned Reflexes (1927), Pavlov gave
due credit to René Descartes for developing the idea of the reflex 300 years before. He
noted that what Descartes called the nervous reflex was the starting point for his research program.
Pavlov’s first experiments with dogs were simple. He held a piece of bread in his hand
and showed it to the dog before giving it to the animal to eat. In time, the dog began to
salivate as soon as it saw the bread. The dog’s response of salivating when food is placed
in its mouth is a natural reflexive response of the digestive system; no learning is necessary for it to occur. Pavlov called this an innate or unconditioned reflex.
Salivating at the sight of food, however, is not reflexive but must be learned. Pavlov now
called this response a conditional reflex (instead of his earlier mentalistic term “psychic
reflex”) because it was conditional or dependent on the dog’s forming an association or
connection between the sight of the food and the subsequent eating of it.
In translating Pavlov’s work from the Russian into the English language, W. H. Gantt,
his American disciple, used the word “conditioned” instead of “conditional.” Gantt later
said he regretted making the change. Nevertheless, conditioned reflex remains the
accepted term.
Pavlov and his assistants discovered that many stimuli would produce the conditional
salivary response in laboratory animals as long as a stimulus was capable of attracting
the animal’s attention without arousing anger or fear. They tested buzzers, lights, whistles, tones, bubbling water, and ticking metronomes with the dogs and achieved similar
results.
The thoroughness and precision of the research program are evident in the sophisticated equipment devised to collect saliva, which flowed through a rubber tube attached
to a surgical opening in the dog’s cheek. When each drop of saliva fell onto a platform
resting on a sensitive spring, it activated a marker on a revolving drum. This arrangement, which made it possible to record the precise number of drops and the exact moment at which each fell, is but one example of Pavlov’s painstaking efforts to follow the
scientific method—to standardize experimental conditions, apply rigorous controls, and
eliminate sources of error.

The Tower of Silence Pavlov was so concerned about preventing outside influences
from affecting the reliability of the research that he designed special cubicles, one for
the experimental animal and another for the experimenter. The researcher could operate
the various conditioning stimuli, collect saliva, and present food without being seen by the
animal.
These precautions did not completely satisfy him. He worried that extraneous environmental stimuli might contaminate the results. Using funds supplied by a Russian
businessman, Pavlov designed a three-story research building, known as the “Tower of
Silence.” The windows were covered with extra-thick glass and the rooms had double
steel doors that formed an airtight seal when closed. Steel girders embedded in sand supported the floors. A straw-filled moat encircled the building. Vibration, noise, temperature extremes, odors, and drafts were eliminated. Pavlov wanted nothing to influence the
experimental animals except the conditioning stimuli to which he exposed them.
A conditioning experiment

Let us follow a typical conditioning experiment in
Pavlov’s laboratory. The conditioned stimulus (a light, let us say) is presented; in this
example, we will say that the light is switched on. Immediately, the experimenter presents

Ivan Petrovitch Pavlov (1849–1936)

Reinforcement:
Something that increases the likelihood
of a response.

205

the unconditioned stimulus—the food. After a number of pairings of the light and the
food, the animal will salivate at the sight of the light alone. An association or bond has
been formed between the light and the food, and the animal has become conditioned to
respond to the conditioned stimulus. This conditioning or learning will not occur unless
the light is followed by the food a sufficient number of times. Thus, reinforcement
(actually being fed) is necessary for learning to take place.
It is important to note that Pavlov’s experimental program extended over a longer
time period and involved more people than any research effort since Wundt. In the
following excerpts from Pavlov’s book, Conditioned Reflexes, we see how he built on
the work of Descartes and how his approach was analytic, mechanistic, and atomistic. Also note how rigorous were the conditions under which he carried out his
research.

IN THEIR OWN WORDS
Original Source Material from Conditioned Reflexes (1927)
Ivan Pavlov
Our starting point has been Descartes’ idea of the nervous reflex. This is a genuine scientific conception, since it implies necessity. It may be summed up as follows: An external or internal stimulus falls on some one or other nervous receptor and gives rise to a
nervous impulse; this nervous impulse is transmitted along nerve fibers to the central
nervous system, and here, on account of existing nervous connections, it gives rise to
a fresh impulse which passes along outgoing nerve fibers to the active organ, where it
excites a special activity of the cellular structures. Thus a stimulus appears to be connected of necessity with a definite response, as cause with effect. It seems obvious
that the whole activity of the organism should conform to definite laws.…
Reflexes are the elemental units in the mechanism of perpetual equilibration. Physiologists have studied and are studying at the present time these numerous machinelike, inevitable reactions of the organism—reflexes existing from the very birth of the
animal, and due therefore to the inherent organization of the nervous system.
Reflexes [are] like the driving-belts of machines of human design.… It was thought
at the beginning of our research that it would be sufficient simply to isolate the experimenter in the research chamber with the dog on its stand, and to refuse admission to
anyone else during the course of an experiment. But this precaution was found to be
wholly inadequate, since the experimenter, however still he might try to be, was himself a constant source of a large number of stimuli. His slightest movements—blinking
of the eyelids or movement of the eyes, posture, respiration, and so on—all acted as
stimuli which, falling upon the dog, were sufficient to vitiate the experiments by making exact interpretation of the results extremely difficult.
In order to exclude this undue influence on the part of the experimenter as far as
possible, he had to be stationed outside the room in which the dog was placed, and
even this precaution proved unsuccessful in laboratories not specially designed for
the study of these particular reflexes. The environment of the animal, even when shut
up by itself in a room, is perpetually changing. Footfalls of a passer-by, chance conversations in neighboring rooms, slamming of a door or vibration from a passing van,
street-cries, even shadows cast through the windows into the room, any of these casual uncontrolled stimuli falling upon the receptors of the dog set up a disturbance in
the cerebral hemispheres and vitiate the experiments.
To get over all these disturbing factors a special laboratory was built at the Institute of Experimental Medicine in Petrograd, the funds being provided by a keen and

206

Chapter 9: Behaviorism: Antecedent Influences

public-spirited Moscow businessman. The primary task was the protection of the dogs
from uncontrolled extraneous stimuli, and this was effected by surrounding the building with an isolating trench and employing other special structural devices. Inside the
building all the research rooms (four to each floor) were isolated from one another by
a cross-shaped corridor; the top and ground floors, where these rooms were situated,
were separated by an intermediate floor. Each research room was carefully partitioned
by the use of soundproof materials into two compartments—one for the animal, the
other for the experimenter. For stimulating the animal, and for registering the corresponding reflex response, electrical methods or pneumatic transmission were used. By
means of these arrangements it was possible to get something of that stability of environmental conditions so essential to the carrying out of a successful experiment.

E. B. Twitmyer (1873–1943)
One historical sidelight involves another instance of independent simultaneous discovery.
In 1904 a young American named Edwin Burket Twitmyer (1873–1943), a former student
of Lightner Witmer’s at the University of Pennsylvania, presented a paper at the annual
convention of the APA based on his doctoral dissertation, which he had completed two
years earlier. His work concerned the familiar knee-jerk reflex. Twitmyer had noticed that
his subjects began to respond to stimuli other than the original stimulus, which was the
tap of the hammer just below the knee. He described the subjects’ reactions as a new and
unusual kind of reflex and suggested that it be a topic for further study.
No one at the meeting expressed any interest in Twitmyer’s report. There were no
questions from the audience after he finished his presentation, and his research findings
were ignored. Discouraged, he did not pursue the issue.
Historians have suggested several reasons for Twitmyer’s continued obscurity. The
Zeitgeist in American psychology may not have been ready to accept the notion of a
conditioned reflex. Twitmyer may have been too young and inexperienced, or he may
have lacked the skills and economic resources to persevere and publicize his ideas. Or
perhaps it was simply a matter of bad timing that day. Twitmyer delivered his talk on
reflexes just before lunch, as part of a series of papers in a session chaired by William
James. The meeting was running late, and James (perhaps hungry, maybe bored) adjourned the meeting without allowing much time for comments on Twitmyer’s report.
An obituary written by a friend and colleague noted that “Twitmyer’s own recollections
of the occasion were always mingled with feelings of disappointment at the failure of his
[audience] to express interest in his results” (Irwin, 1943, p. 452).
Periodically, historians revive this sad tale of a scientist who could have become famous for making one of the most important discoveries in all of psychology. “Surely
Twitmyer must have wrestled with that realization most of his life—an awareness of
what his legacy to psychology might have been” (Benjamin, 1987, p. 1119).
Another relatively unknown precursor of Pavlov’s work was Alois Kreidl, an Austrian
physiologist who demonstrated the basic principles of conditioning in 1896, predating
Twitmyer’s report by some eight years. Kreidl found that goldfish learned to anticipate
feedings from the stimuli associated with the laboratory attendant walking toward their
tank. Kreidl concluded that the fish saw the keeper approach, “then they became alert
through the vibrations in the water produced by his [footsteps]” (quoted in Logan,
2002, p. 397). Kreidl’s main interest, however, was the process of sensation, not conditioning or learning, and so these findings were not pursued within the scientific
community.

Vladimir M. Bekhterev (1857–1927)

207

Comment
Pavlov demonstrated that higher mental processes in animal subjects could be described
in physiological terms without any mention of consciousness. His conditioning methods
have had broad practical applications in areas such as behavior therapy. Joseph Wolpe
(1915–1997), the founder of behavior therapy, called Pavlov’s conditioning principles essential to the development of his methods (Wolpe & Plaud, 1997). Pavlov’s research also
influenced psychology’s shift toward greater objectivity in subject matter and method
and reinforced the trend toward functional and practical applications.
Pavlov continued in the tradition of mechanism and atomism, views that shaped the
new psychology from its beginnings. To Pavlov, all animals—whether his laboratory dogs
or human beings—were machines. He admitted that they were complicated machines,
but he believed, as one historian put it, that they were “just as submissive and obedient
as any other machine” (Mazlish, 1993, p. 124).
Pavlov’s conditioning techniques provided psychology with a basic element of behavior, a workable concrete unit to which complex human behavior could be reduced and
experimented on under laboratory conditions. John B. Watson recognized this unit of
behavior and made it the core of his program. Pavlov noted that he was pleased with
Watson’s work and that the growth of behaviorism in the United States represented a
confirmation of his ideas and methods.
It is ironic that Pavlov’s greatest influence was in psychology, a field toward which he
was not altogether favorable. He was familiar with the structuralist and functionalist
schools of thought. Also, he knew of William James’s work and agreed with James that
psychology might claim to be a science but had not yet achieved that status. Consequently, Pavlov excluded psychology from his own scientific work and even levied fines
on laboratory assistants who used psychological terminology instead of physiological terminology. Pavlov later revised his attitude toward the field and occasionally referred to
himself as an experimental psychologist. In any case, his initially negative view did not
prevent psychologists from making effective use of his work.

Vladimir M. Bekhterev (1857–1927)
Vladimir Bekhterev is another important figure in the development of animal psychology
in that he helped lead the field away from subjective ideas toward objectively observed
overt behavior. Although less well known than Ivan Pavlov, this Russian physiologist, neurologist, and psychiatrist was a pioneer in several research areas. He was a political radical
openly critical of the czar and the Russian government. He accepted women and Jews as
students and colleagues at a time when they were excluded from Russian universities.
Bekhterev received his degree from St. Petersburg’s Military Medical Academy in
1881. He studied at the University of Leipzig with Wilhelm Wundt, took additional
courses in Berlin and Paris, and returned to Russia to accept a professorship in mental
diseases at the University of Kazan. In 1893 he was appointed chair of mental and nervous diseases at the Military Medical Academy, where he organized a mental hospital. In
1907 he founded the Psychoneurological Institute, which now bears his name.
Bekhterev and Pavlov became enemies after Pavlov published a negative review of one
of Bekhterev’s books:
The enmity between Bekhterev and Pavlov was so pronounced that they would insult each
other in the street. If they ran into each other at the same congress they would soon be
embroiled in dispute. Forming cliques and slinging snide shots at each other, they were engaged in a constant struggle to expose one another’s faults and weaknesses. No sooner had
some pupil of Bekhterev made a public statement than it was parried by Pavlov’s retort—
which followed virtually as a conditioned reflex. (Ljunggren, 1990, p. 60)

208

Chapter 9: Behaviorism: Antecedent Influences

In 1927, 10 years after the Bolshevik Revolution toppled the czar, Bekhterev was summoned to Moscow to treat Joseph Stalin, who was said to be suffering from depression.
Bekhterev examined the dictator and told him the diagnosis was severe paranoia. Suspiciously, Bekhterev died that afternoon. No autopsy was permitted, and the body was
quickly cremated. It was suggested that Stalin had Bekhterev poisoned as revenge for
the psychiatric diagnosis. Stalin later ordered Bekhterev’s research work suppressed and
had his son executed (Lerner, Margolin, & Witztum, 2005; Ljunggren, 1990). In 1952, a
year before Stalin died, the Soviet Union issued a postage stamp honoring Bekhterev.

Associated Reflexes

Associated reflexes:
Reflexes that can be
elicited not only by
unconditioned stimuli
but also by stimuli that
have become associated with the unconditioned stimuli.

Whereas Pavlov’s conditioning research focused almost exclusively on glandular secretions, Bekhterev’s interest was the motor conditioning response. In other words, he applied Pavlov’s conditioning principles to the muscles. Bekhterev’s basic discoveries were
the associated reflexes, revealed through his study of motor responses. He found that
reflexive movements—such as withdrawing one’s finger from the source of an electric
shock—could be elicited not only by the unconditioned stimulus (the electric shock),
but also by the stimuli that had become associated with the original stimulus. For example, a buzzer sounded at the time of the shock soon brought about by itself the withdrawal of the finger.
The associationists explained such connections in terms of mental processes, but
Bekhterev considered the reactions to be reflexive. He believed that higher-level behaviors of greater complexity could be explained in the same way; that is, as an accumulation or compounding of lower-level motor reflexes. Thought processes were similar in
that they depended on inner actions of the speech musculature, an idea later adopted
by Watson. Bekhterev argued for a completely objective approach to psychological phenomena and against the use of mentalistic terms and concepts.
He described his ideas in the book Objective Psychology, published in 1907. It was
translated into German and French in 1913, and a third edition was published in English
in 1932 as General Principles of Human Reflexology.
From the beginnings of animal psychology in the work of Romanes and Morgan, we
can see a steady movement toward increased objectivity in subject matter and methodology. The initial work in the field invoked consciousness and mental processes and relied
on subjective research methods. But by the early twentieth century, animal psychology
was completely objective in subject matter and methods. Glandular secretions, conditional responses, acts, behaviors—these terms left no doubt that animal psychology had
discarded its subjective past.
Animal psychology soon was to become a model for behaviorism, whose leader,
Watson, preferred animal to human subjects for his psychological research. Watson
made the findings and techniques of the animal psychologists the foundation of a science
of behavior applicable to animals and humans alike.

The Influence of Functional Psychology
on Behaviorism
Another direct antecedent of behaviorism was functionalism. Although not a totally objective school of thought, functional psychology in Watson’s day did represent greater
objectivity than did its predecessors. Cattell and other functionalists emphasized behavior
and objectivity and expressed dissatisfaction with introspection (see Chapter 8). Mark
Arthur May (1891–1977), a graduate student at Columbia University in 1915, recalled
Cattell’s visit to his laboratory:

The Influence of Functional Psychology on Behaviorism

209

May showed Cattell the equipment, which impressed him, but when May attempted to
show Cattell the introspective reports obtained from the subjects, Cattell muttered “Not
worth a damn!” and stormed out of the lab. (quoted in May, 1978, p. 655)
Applied psychologists had little use for consciousness and introspection, and their
various specialty areas essentially constituted an objective functional psychology. Even
before Watson came on the scene, the functional psychologists had moved away from
Wundt’s and Titchener’s pure psychology of conscious experience. In writings and lectures, some functional psychologists were quite specific in calling for an objective psychology, a psychology that would focus on behavior instead of consciousness.
Cattell, speaking at the 1904 World’s Fair in St. Louis, Missouri, said:
I am not convinced that psychology should be limited to the study of consciousness.…
The rather widespread notion that there is no psychology apart from introspection is
refuted by the brute argument of accomplished fact. It seems to me that most of the
research work that has been done by me or in my laboratory is nearly as independent
of introspection as work in physics or in zoology.… I see no reason why the application
of systematized knowledge to the control of human nature may not in the course of the
present century accomplish results commensurate with the nineteenth-century applications of physical science to the material world. (pp. 179–180, 186)
Watson was in the audience for Cattell’s speech. The similarity between Cattell’s talk
and Watson’s later public position is striking. One historian suggested that if Watson is
the father of behaviorism, Cattell should be called the grandfather (Burnham, 1968).
In the decade before Watson formally founded behaviorism, the intellectual climate in
the United States favored the idea of an objective psychology. Indeed, the overall movement of American psychology was in a behavioristic direction. Robert Woodworth at
Columbia University wrote that American psychologists were “slowly coming down
with behaviorism … as more and more of them, from 1904 on, expressed a preference
for defining psychology as the science of behavior rather than as an attempt to describe
consciousness” (Woodworth, 1943, p. 28).
In 1911, Walter Pillsbury, who had studied with Titchener, defined psychology in his textbook as the science of behavior. He argued that it was possible to treat human beings as objectively as any other aspect of the physical universe. That same year Max Meyer published a
book titled The Fundamental Laws of Human Behavior. William McDougall wrote Psychology: The Study of Behavior (1912), and Knight Dunlap, a psychologist at Johns Hopkins University, where Watson was teaching, proposed that introspection be banned from psychology.
Also that year, William Montague presented a paper—“Has Psychology Lost Its
Mind?”—to the APA’s New York branch. Montague spoke of moving to discard the
“concept of mind or consciousness and to substitute the concept of behavior as the sufficient object of psychological study” (quoted in Benjamin, 1993, p. 77).
J. R. Angell at the University of Chicago, perhaps the most progressive of the functional psychologists, predicted that American psychology was ready for greater objectivity. In 1910, he commented that it seemed possible that the term “consciousness” would
disappear from psychology, much as the term “soul” had disappeared. Three years later,
shortly before the publication of Watson’s behaviorist manifesto, Angell (1913) suggested
that it would be profitable if consciousness were forgotten and animal and human behavior described objectively instead.
Thus, the notion that psychology should be the science of behavior was already gaining converts. Watson’s greatness was not in being the first to propose the idea but in
seeing, perhaps more clearly than anyone else, what the times were calling for. He responded boldly and articulately as the agent of a revolution whose inevitability and success were assured, because it was already under way.

210

Chapter 9: Behaviorism: Antecedent Influences

Discussion Questions
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.

10.

Why was Clever Hans considered such a sensation throughout the Western world?
In what ways had psychology changed by the
second decade of the twentieth century?
Describe the basic tenets of Watson’s behaviorism and show how they differed from the positions of Wundt and Titchener.
Why was Watson so opposed to the study of
consciousness and the method of introspection?
What were the three major forces Watson
brought together to form his new psychology?
What role did positivism play in the scientific
Zeitgeist of the twentieth century?
Describe the development of animal psychology
since the work of Romanes and Morgan. Why
was it difficult to be an animal psychologist?
In what ways did Loeb, Washburn, Small, and
Turner influence the new animal psychology?
Discuss the impact of the Clever Hans incident
on animal psychology. What did Pfungst’s
experiments demonstrate?
Relate Thorndike’s connectionism to the older
philosophical notion of association.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.
16.
17.
18.

19.

Describe Thorndike’s puzzle-box research and
the laws of learning suggested by the results.
Discuss the overall significance for the development of behaviorism of Thorndike’s research on
human and animal learning.
Describe Pavlov’s initial focus on mentalistic
experiences and his attempts to control outside
influences on his research.
How would you design an experiment to condition a rabbit to salivate to the ringing of a cell
phone?
How did Pavlov’s work influence Watson’s
behaviorism?
Compare Pavlov’s concept of conditioned reflex
with Bekhterev’s associated reflex.
What is Twitmyer’s experience of interest to
historians of psychology?
Discuss the Zeitgeist in American psychology in
the second decade of the twentieth century with
reference to ideas promoted by the structuralists
and functionalists.
How did the functionalist school influence
Watson’s behaviorism?

Recommended Resources
Bitterman, M. E. (1969). Thorndike and the problem of
animal intelligence. American Psychologist, 24,
444–453.
Discusses Thorndike’s career at Columbia University and his puzzle-box experiments on animal
learning.
Dewsbury, D. A. (1990). Early interaction between
animal psychologists and animal activists and the
founding of the APA Committee on Precautions in
Animal Experimentation. American Psychologist, 45,
315–327.
Reviews the conflict between comparative psychology and the animal rights movement; recounts media attacks on animal researchers such as Hall,
Pavlov, Thorndike, and Watson.
Fernald, D. (1984). The Hans legacy: A story of science.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Recounts the Clever Hans story and its implications
for scientific inquiry.
Todes, D. (2001). Pavlov’s physiology factory: Experiment, interpretation, laboratory enterprise.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

A thought-provoking, scholarly work portraying
Pavlov as scientific entrepreneur.
Windholz, G. (1990). Pavlov and the Pavlovians in the
laboratory. Journal of the History of the Behavioral
Sciences, 26, 64–74.
Describes the daily routine in Pavlov’s laboratory
and his influence on associates and students.
Yerkes, R. M. (1961). Autobiography. In C. Murchison
(Ed.), A history of psychology in autobiography
(Vol. 2, pp. 381–407). New York: Russell & Russell.
(Original work published 1930).
Yerkes’s account of his career in comparative
psychology.
Zagrina, N. (2009). Ivan Petrovich Pavlov and the authorities. Neuroscience and Behavioral Physiology,
39, 383–385.
Cites recently released and translated documents
from Russian scientific sources to describe Pavlov’s
contentious relationship with the government.

CHAPTER

10

Behaviorism: The Beginnings

The Psychologist, the
Baby, and the Hammer:
Don’t Try This at Home!
John B. Watson
(1878–1958)
Watson’s Life
The Development
of Behaviorism
The Reaction to Watson’s
Program
The Methods of
Behaviorism
The Subject Matter
of Behaviorism
Instincts
Emotions
Albert, Peter, and the
Rabbits
Thought Processes
Behaviorism’s Popular
Appeal
An Outbreak of
Psychology
Criticisms of Watson’s
Behaviorism
Karl Lashley (1890–
1958)
William McDougall
(1871–1938)
The Watson–McDougall
Debate
Contributions of Watson’s
Behaviorism
Discussion Questions
Recommended Resources

The Psychologist, the Baby, and the Hammer:
Don’t Try This at Home!
The beautiful young graduate student held the baby while the handsome, distinguished
psychologist held the hammer. She waved her hand slowly in the air to hold the baby’s
attention so that he would fixate on it and not turn his head to look above or behind
him. Thus distracted, the child did not notice the steel rod, four feet in length and
three-fourths of an inch thick, hanging from the ceiling. He did not see the man who
raised the hammer and sharply struck the metal bar.
The dry prose of their research report stated, “The child started violently, his breathing was checked and the arms were raised.” When the psychologist struck the bar again,
the child’s lips “began to pucker and tremble” and with the third strike he “broke into a
sudden crying fit” (Watson & Rayner, 1920, p. 2).
Have you guessed who these people are and what they were doing? The subject of this
experiment became known as “Little Albert,” the most famous baby in the history of
psychology. The handsome psychologist was 42-year-old John B. Watson, the founder
of the school of thought called behaviorism. His assistant was 21-year-old Rosalie Rayner,
a graduate student who drove to the Johns Hopkins University campus in her Stutz
Bearcat, the hottest and most expensive sports car of the time. Together they changed
psychology and, in the process, ended Watson’s brilliant academic career.
Albert (his surname remains unknown) was eight months old when the hammer
struck the metal bar behind his head. A healthy, happy baby, he had been chosen by
Watson to be the subject of his research precisely because he seemed so emotionally stable and not easily excited.
Two months before he was fated to be startled by the hammer strikes Albert had been
shown a variety of stimuli, including a white rat, a rabbit, a dog, a monkey, burning
newspapers, and an assortment of masks. He had not displayed any fear in response to
those objects. In fact, neither Albert’s mother nor anyone else had ever noticed the child
displaying fear of any kind in any situation—until that day in the laboratory.
After Watson struck the bar initially, Albert reacted fearfully, apparently for the first
time in his life. This gave Watson an unconditioned emotional response with which to
work. He wanted to find out if he could produce in Albert a conditioned emotional
response—such as fear of a white rat that he had not previously been afraid of—by pairing
the sight of the rat with the loud, startling noise. In no more than seven pairings of the
white rat with the noise, the child showed fear every time he spotted the rat, even when
the bar had not been struck behind his head.
Thus Watson and Rayner established a response of fear to a previously neutral object,
and they had done so easily and effectively. They then demonstrated that Albert’s fear
211

212

Chapter 10: Behaviorism: The Beginnings

response could be generalized to other furry white things such as a rabbit, a dog, a fur
coat, and a Santa Claus mask!
Watson concluded that our adult fears, anxieties, and phobias must therefore be simple conditioned emotional responses that were established in infancy and childhood and
that stayed with us throughout our lives.
And what about Little Albert? Did he hide from furry white objects for the rest of his
life? Did he have to undergo psychotherapy? Perhaps he became a psychologist. Attempts have been made to discover his real name and whereabouts, but so far they
have been unsuccessful. (See, for example, Beck, Levinson, & Irons, 2009; Deangelis,
2010; Powell, 2010.) Although his identity remains unknown, there is no denying his
contribution to the history of psychology and his role in the development of John B.
Watson’s behaviorism.

John B. Watson (1878–1958)
Photo courtesy of James B. Watson

We have discussed several trends that influenced John B. Watson in his attempt to construct the behaviorist school of thought for psychology. He recognized that founding is
not the same as originating, and he described his efforts as a crystallization of the ideas
already emerging within psychology. Like Wilhelm Wundt, psychology’s first promoterfounder, Watson announced his goal of founding a new school. This deliberate intention
clearly distinguishes him from others whom history now labels as precursors of
behaviorism.

Watson’s Life
JOHN B. WATSON

John B. Watson was born on a farm near Greenville, South Carolina, where his early
education was conducted in a one-room schoolhouse. His mother was intensely religious,
his father the opposite. The elder Watson drank heavily, was given to violence, and had
several extramarital affairs. Because he rarely held any job for long, the family lived on
the edge of poverty, subsisting on the output of their farm. Neighbors regarded them
with pity and contempt. When Watson was 13 his father ran off with another woman,
never to return, and Watson resented him all his life. Years later, when Watson was rich
and famous, his father went to New York to see him, but Watson refused to meet him.
As a youth and teenager, Watson was something of a delinquent. He characterized
himself as lazy and insubordinate, and he never earned better than passing grades in
school. Teachers recalled him as indolent, argumentative, and sometimes uncontrollable.
He got into fistfights and was twice arrested, once for shooting a gun within the city
limits. Nevertheless, at age 16 he enrolled at Baptist-affiliated Furman University in
Greenville, intending to become a minister, something he had promised his mother. He
studied philosophy, mathematics, Latin, and Greek, expecting to enter Princeton Theological Seminary after graduating from Furman.
A curious thing allegedly occurred during Watson’s senior year at Furman. The story
is told that a professor warned the students that anyone who handed in the final examination with the pages in reverse order would receive a failing grade. Watson took up the
challenge, turned in his exam backward, and failed; at least that is how Watson reported
the story. Later examination of the pertinent historical data—in this case, Watson’s
grades—shows that he did not fail that particular course. His biographer suggests that
the story Watson chose to tell reveals something of his personality, “his ambivalence toward success. Watson’s constant striving for achievement and approval was often sabotaged by acts of sheer obstinacy and impulsiveness more characteristic of a flight from
respectability” (Buckley, 1989, p. 11). Another of Watson’s professors remembered him
as a nonconformist, “a brilliant but somewhat lazy and insolent student—a bit heavy but

John B. Watson (1878–1958)

213

handsome—who thought too highly of himself and was more interested in his own ideas
than in people” (Brewer, 1991, p. 174).
Watson remained at Furman for another year, receiving his master’s degree in 1899,
but during that year his mother died, which released him from his vow to become a clergyman. Instead of the theological seminary, Watson went to the University of Chicago.
His biographer noted that Watson was at this time “an ambitious, extremely statusconscious young man, anxious to make his mark upon the world but wholly unsettled
as to his choice of profession and desperately insecure about his lack of means and social
sophistication. He arrived on campus with fifty dollars to his name” (Buckley, 1989,
p. 39).
He had chosen Chicago to pursue graduate work in philosophy with the great John
Dewey but found Dewey’s lectures incomprehensible. “I never knew what he was talking
about then,” Watson said, “and, unfortunately for me, I still don’t know” (1936, p. 274).
Not surprisingly, Watson’s enthusiasm for philosophy diminished. Attracted to psychology by the work of James Rowland Angell, the functional psychologist, Watson also
studied biology and physiology with Jacques Loeb, who acquainted him with the concept
of mechanism.
Watson held several part-time jobs, working as a waiter in a boarding house, a rat
caretaker, and an assistant janitor responsible for dusting Angell’s desk. He began to
have acute anxiety attacks toward the end of his graduate school years, and for a while
he was unable to sleep without a light on in his room.
In 1903 Watson received his Ph.D. at age 25, the youngest person in the University of
Chicago’s history to earn a doctoral degree. Although he graduated with honors (magna
cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa), he experienced profound feelings of inferiority when
Angell and Dewey told him that his doctoral examination was not as good as that of
Helen Bradford Thompson Woolley, who had graduated three years earlier (see Chapter
7). Watson wrote, “I wondered then if anybody could ever equal her record. That jealousy existed for years” (1936, p. 274).
That year Watson married one of his students, 19-year-old Mary Ickes, from a socially and politically prominent family. She had written a long love poem to Watson on
one of her examination papers. It is not known what grade she got, but she did get Watson. Unfortunately, the marriage proved unsatisfactory for both (Buckley, 1989).

Watson’s academic career

Watson stayed at the University of Chicago as an instructor until 1908. He published his dissertation on the neurological and psychological
maturation of the white rat, research that showed his early preference for animal
subjects:
I never wanted to use human subjects. I hated to serve as a subject. I didn’t like the
stuffy, artificial instructions given to subjects. I always was uncomfortable and acted
unnaturally. With animals I was at home. I felt that, in studying them, I was keeping
close to biology with my feet on the ground. More and more the thought presented
itself: Can’t I find out by watching their behavior everything that the other students
are finding out by using [human observers]? (1936, p. 276)
Watson’s colleagues recall that he was not successful at introspection. Whatever talent
or temperament was needed to pursue that technique, Watson did not have it. This lack
may have helped to direct him toward an objective behavioral psychology. After all, if he
was hopeless at practicing introspection, the primary research technique in his field, then
career prospects were surely dim. He would have to develop another approach. Also, if
he followed his inclination to see psychology as a science that studied only behavior—
which, of course, could be done by experimenting on animals as well as humans—then

214

Chapter 10: Behaviorism: The Beginnings

he could help bring the professional interests of animal psychologists into the
mainstream.
In 1908, Watson was offered a professorship at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. Although he was reluctant to leave Chicago, the promised promotion, substantial
raise, and the chance to direct the laboratory left him little choice. As it turned out, Watson’s 12 years at Hopkins were his most productive for psychology.
James Mark Baldwin (1861–1934), the psychologist who had offered Watson the job,
was one of the founders (along with James McKeen Cattell) of the journal Psychological
Review. A year after Watson arrived at Hopkins, Baldwin was forced to resign because of
a scandal. He had been caught in a police raid on a house of prostitution, and his explanation was unacceptable to the university president. Baldwin said that he had “foolishly
yielded to a suggestion, made after a dinner, to visit [the brothel] and see what was done
there. I did not know before going that immoral women were harbored there” (quoted in
Evans & Scott, 1978, p. 713). He did, however, give a false name to the police. Baldwin
became an outcast from American psychology and spent his remaining years in England
and in Mexico. He died in Paris in 1934 (Horley, 2001). Eleven years after Baldwin’s dismissal, history would repeat itself. The same university president called for Watson’s resignation because of another sex scandal.
When Baldwin resigned, Watson became chair of the psychology department and editor
of the influential Psychological Review. Thus, at age 31, he suddenly had become a major
figure in American psychology, in the right place at the right time. “The whole tenor of
my life was changed,” he wrote. “I tasted freedom in work without supervision. I was lost
and happy in my work.” Watson was less happy at home, however. “Two kids are enough,”
he wrote after his second son was born (quoted in Hulbert, 2003, p. 131). He began to pursue an active social life and developed a reputation as a womanizer, not unlike his father.
Watson was extremely popular with the Hopkins students. They dedicated their yearbook to him and voted him the handsomest professor, surely a unique accolade in the
history of psychology. He remained ambitious and intense. Often fearful of losing control, he would drive himself to exhaustion.

The Development of Behaviorism
Watson began to think seriously about a more objective psychology around 1903, and he
expressed these ideas publicly in 1908 in a lecture at Yale University and in a paper presented at the annual meeting in Baltimore of the Southern Society for Philosophy and
Psychology. Watson argued that psychic or mental concepts have no value for a science
of psychology. In 1912, at Cattell’s invitation, Watson delivered a series of lectures at
Columbia University. The following year, he published his now famous article in the Psychological Review (Watson, 1913), and behaviorism was officially launched.
Watson’s book, Behavior: An Introduction to Comparative Psychology, appeared in
1914. He argued for the acceptance of animal psychology and described the advantages
of using animal subjects in psychological research. Many younger psychologists and
graduate students found his proposals for a behavioral psychology appealing, insisting
that Watson was cleansing psychology’s muddled atmosphere by casting out longstanding mysteries carried over from philosophy.
Mary Cover Jones (1896–1987), then a graduate student and later president of the
APA’s Division of Developmental Psychology, recalled the excitement that greeted the
publication of each of Watson’s books. “[Watson’s behaviorism] shook the foundations
of traditional European-bred psychology, and we welcomed it.… It pointed the way
from armchair psychology to action and reform and was therefore hailed as a panacea”
(Jones, 1974, p. 582). Older psychologists usually were not so captivated by Watson’s
program. Indeed, most of them rejected his approach.

John B. Watson (1878–1958)

215

Only two years after the publication of the Psychological Review article, Watson was
elected president of the APA. His election may not have represented an official endorsement of his position as much as it served as recognition of his visibility and the personal
network he had established with many prominent psychologists.
He wanted his new behaviorism to be of practical value; his ideas were not only for
the laboratory but for the real world as well. He promoted psychology’s applied specialties and became a personnel consultant for a large insurance company. He also offered a
course for business students at Hopkins on the psychology of advertising and started a
program to train graduate students to work in industrial psychology.
During World War I, Watson served as a major in the U.S. Army, developing perceptual and motor ability tests to be used as selection devices for pilots. He also conducted
research on how pilots are affected by the reduced oxygen at high altitudes. After the
war, Watson and a physician established the Industrial Service Corporation to provide
personnel selection and management consulting assistance to the business world (DiClemente & Hantula, 2000).
Despite his activities in these applied psychology areas, Watson’s focus remained on
developing his behaviorist approach to psychological thought. In 1919 he published Psychology from the Standpoint of a Behaviorist, which he dedicated to Cattell. In the book
he presented a more complete statement of his behavioral psychology and argued that
the methods and principles he had recommended for animal psychology were also appropriate for the study of humans.

An affair to remember

Meanwhile, Watson’s marriage deteriorated; his many infidelities made his wife furious. He wrote to Angell that Mary no longer cared for him.
“She instinctively loathes my touch. Haven’t we made a mess of our lives?” (Watson,
quoted in Buckley, 1994, p. 27). He was about to make an even greater mess.
Watson fell in love with Rosalie Rayner and wrote torrid, if somewhat scientifically
worded, love letters, 15 of which his wife found. During the sensational divorce proceedings that followed, excerpts of the letters were printed in the Baltimore Sun newspaper:
Every cell I have is yours, individually and collectively. My total reactions are positive
and toward you. So likewise each and every heart reaction. I can’t be more yours than
I am, even if a surgical operation made us one. (Watson, quoted in Pauly, 1979, p. 40)

Thus ended Watson’s promising university career. He was forced to resign from
Johns Hopkins, an act that “almost certainly altered the history of American psychology”
(Benjamin, Whitaker, Ramsey, & Zeve, 2007, p. 131). A biographer wrote, “Watson was
stunned. Until the end, he had refused to believe that he would actually be fired. He had
been convinced that his professional stature would have rendered him impervious to any
censure of his private life” (Buckley, 1994, p. 31). Although he married Rosalie Rayner,
he was never permitted to return to a full-time academic position. No university would
have him because of the notoriety attached to his name, and he soon realized he would
have to make a new life. “I can find a commercial job,” he wrote, “but I frankly love my
work. I feel that my work is important for psychology and that the tiny flame which I
have tried to keep burning for the future of psychology will be snuffed out if I go”
(quoted in Pauly, 1986, p. 39).
Many academic colleagues, including his mentor Angell at the University of Chicago,
publicly criticized Watson. He was bitter about their lack of support, believing they were
somehow disloyal. Ironically, considering their radically different temperaments and theoretical positions, it was E. B. Titchener at Cornell University who provided emotional
sustenance for Watson during this personal crisis. “I am terribly sorry for the Watson
children,” Titchener wrote to Robert Yerkes. “Just as I am sorry for Watson himself; he

216

Chapter 10: Behaviorism: The Beginnings

will have to disappear for five or ten years, I am afraid, if he ever wants to return to
psychology” (quoted in Leys & Evans, 1990, p. 105).

Watson’s business career Unemployed and ordered to pay two-thirds of his former
salary in alimony and child support, Watson began a second professional career as an
applied psychologist in the field of advertising. He joined the J. Walter Thompson advertising agency in 1921 for an annual salary of $25,000, four times his academic salary. He
conducted house-to-house surveys, sold coffee, and clerked in Macy’s department store
to learn about the business world. Acting with his characteristic ingenuity and drive, he
became a vice president within three years. He joined another advertising agency in
1936, where he remained until his retirement in 1945.
Watson believed that human behavior is not unlike that of machines. Therefore, the
behavior of people as consumers of goods and services could be predicted and controlled, just like the behavior of other machines. To control a consumer, he said,
it is only necessary to confront him with either fundamental or conditional emotional
stimuli. … tell him something that will tie up with fear, something that will stir up a
mild rage, that will call out an affectionate or love response, or strike at a deep psychological or habit need. (quoted in Buckley, 1982, p. 212)
He proposed laboratory studies of consumer behavior. He stressed that advertising
messages should focus on style rather than substance and should convey the impression
of a new and improved image. The purpose was to make consumers dissatisfied with the
products they were using and to instill the desire for new goods.
For many years, Watson was credited with pioneering the use of celebrity endorsements of products and services and for devising techniques to manipulate our motives
and emotions. Later research has shown that although he strongly promoted these techniques, they were already in use before he joined the advertising world (see Coon, 1994;
Kreshel, 1990). Nevertheless, Watson’s contributions to advertising were highly effective
and soon brought him prominence and wealth.
After 1920, Watson had only indirect contact with academic psychology. Instead, he
presented his ideas for a behavioral psychology to the general public through lectures,
radio addresses, and articles in popular magazines, thus increasing his visibility—and,
some would say, his notoriety. In one article written for popular consumption, for example, he predicted the end of the institution of marriage. “Monogamy is passing, I believe.
The social mechanism has slipped its trolley. We are unfettered and unshackled and are
romping and frolicking in our freedom” (quoted in Simpson, 2000, p. 64). If Watson was
out to shock people, he was succeeding.
In his magazine articles, Watson also conveyed the more serious message of behaviorism to a wide audience. His writing style was clear, readable, and somewhat simplistic. In
his autobiography he commented that although his work was no longer acceptable to the
professional psychology journals, there was no reason why he should not “sell his wares”
to the public (Watson, 1936). This attitude alienated him further from the academic
community. “Those who were not particularly tolerant of the application of psychological principles more generally, or of the behaviorist doctrine itself, were even less tolerant
of Watson’s ‘campaigns’ to spread the doctrine” (Kreshel, 1990, p. 56).
A rare formal contact with academic psychology came through a series of lectures
Watson delivered at New York’s New School for Social Research, but his appointment
there did not last long. He was dismissed because of alleged sexual misconduct, though
the charges were never made public (Buckley, 1989).
Other outlets for Waston’s views became available, however. The lectures at the New
School formed the basis of his book, Behaviorism, which described his program for the

John B. Watson (1878–1958)

217

improvement of society. The book was first published in 1925, and Watson later admitted that it had been hastily prepared. “My lectures were taken down in shorthand and
then I looked over them and rushed them to [the publisher]” (quoted in Carpentero,
2004, p. 185). A more polished version was released in 1930. Both editions were immensely successful, and Watson’s ideas reached and influenced a large number of people
outside the realm of psychology.

Child-rearing practices

In 1928 Watson published Psychological Care of the Infant
and Child, in which he severely criticized the child-rearing practices of the day. He
charged that “parents today are incompetent. Most of them should be indicted for psychological murder” (quoted in Hulbert, 2003, p. 123). He proposed a regulatory rather
than a permissive system of child rearing, in keeping with his strong environmentalist
position. The book was full of stern advice on the behaviorist way to bring up children.
According to Watson, parents should never
hug and kiss them, never let them sit on your lap. If you must, kiss them once on the
forehead when they say goodnight. Shake hands with them in the morning. Give them a
pat on the head if they have made an extraordinarily good job of a difficult task.…
you will find how easy it is to be perfectly objective with your child and at the same
time kindly. You will be utterly ashamed at the mawkish, sentimental way you have
been handling it. (1928, pp. 81–82)
This book also was extremely popular, and it transformed American child-rearing
practices. A generation of children, including his own, was raised in accordance with
these prescriptions. Watson’s son James, a California businessman, recalled that his father was unable to show affection to him and his brother. He described Watson as
unresponsive, emotionally uncommunicative, unable to express and cope with any feelings or emotions of his own, and determined unwittingly to deprive, I think, my brother
and me of any kind of emotional foundation. He deeply believed that any expression of
tenderness or affection would have a harmful effect on us. He was very rigid in carrying
out his fundamental philosophies as a behaviorist. We were never kissed or held as children; we were never shown any kind of emotional closeness. It was absolutely verboten
in the family. When I went to bed at night, I recall shaking hands with my parents.… I
never tried (nor did my brother Billy) to ever get close to our parents physically because
we both knew it was taboo. (quoted in Hannush, 1987, pp. 137–138)
Watson’s wife, Rosalie, wrote an article for Parents Magazine titled “I Am the
Mother of a Behaviorist’s Sons,” in which she publicly disagreed with his childrearing practices. “In some respects,” she wrote, “I bow to the great wisdom in the
science of behaviorism, and in others I am rebellious. I secretly wish that on the score
of [the children’s] affections, they will be a little weak when they grow up, that they will
have a tear in their eyes for the poetry and drama of life and a throb for romance.…
I like being merry and gay and having the giggles. The behaviorists think giggling is a
sign of maladjustment” (quoted in Simpson, 2000, p. 65). Rosalie also contended that
she found it difficult to restrain completely her affection for her children and
occasionally wanted to break the behaviorist rules. However, her son James could not
recall that ever happening.
Both sons suffered from serious depression throughout adolescence and adulthood.
One son committed suicide and the other had a mental collapse, fighting his own suicidal impulses. Although he survived, his own daughter took her life some years later.
In addition, Watson’s daughter by his first marriage made several suicide attempts.

218

Chapter 10: Behaviorism: The Beginnings

“I’ve always been suicidal,” she told her daughter. “The depression began during the [divorce] scandal in Baltimore” (quoted in Hartley & Commire, 1990, p. 273).
Her daughter (Watson’s granddaughter), the actress Mariette Hartley, also suffered
from depression, alcoholism, and suicidal thoughts. She noted that “there wasn’t exactly
a plethora of physical affection in our family” (quoted in Stimpert, 2010, p. 2) It appears
that Watson’s behavioral approach to child rearing was not exactly a success within his
own family.

Watson’s later years Watson was intelligent, articulate, handsome, and charming,
and it was these qualities that made him a celebrity. He was often in the public eye,
courting and relishing the attention. His clothes were stylish, he raced speedboats, and
he mingled easily with the cream of New York society. He considered himself a great
lover and romantic adventurer, and he liked to take on all challengers in drinking bouts.
He built a mansion in Connecticut and staffed it with servants, yet he enjoyed dressing
in old clothes and doing his own yard work.
[Watson was] very concerned with manly activities, for example, hunting, fishing,
and other ways in which adults and children could demonstrate their courage and
personal capabilities. In that way he had a Hemingway-like aura about him for he
valued competency, bravery and manliness. (James Watson, quoted in Hannush,
1987, p. 138)
In 1935, Rosalie died at the age of 37. James Watson recalled that this was the only
time he saw his father cry. For a brief moment, Watson hugged his sons for the only
time they could recall. He then sent them off to boarding school and never spoke of
Rosalie to them again.
When Myrtle McGraw, a psychologist in New York, ran into Watson not long
afterward, he told her how unprepared he was to deal with Rosalie’s death. Because
he was 20 years older, he had always assumed he would die first. He talked to McGraw
at some length, questioning how he would cope with his grief (McGraw, 1990). He
soon became a recluse, shutting himself off from social contact and plunging into
work. He sold the big house and moved to a wooden farmhouse that resembled his
boyhood home.
In 1957, when Watson was 79, the APA awarded him a citation, praising his work as
“one of the vital determinants of the form and substance of modern psychology … the
point of departure for continuing lines of fruitful research.” A friend drove Watson to
the New York hotel where the presentation was to be held,
but at the last minute Watson refused to go inside and insisted that his eldest son attend in his stead. Watson was afraid that in that moment his emotions would overwhelm him, that the apostle of behavior control would break down and weep.
(Buckley, 1989, p. 182)
Before Watson died the following year, he burned all of his letters, manuscripts, and
notes, feeding them into the fireplace one by one, refusing to leave them to history.
The best way to begin our coverage of Watson’s behaviorist school of thought is to
read an excerpt from the article that launched the movement. In the following passage,
Watson discusses the definition and goal of his new psychology and criticizes the structuralist and functionalist schools. He also explains his view that areas of applied psychology can be considered scientific because they seek general laws for the prediction and
control of behavior.

John B. Watson (1878–1958)

219

IN THEIR OWN WORDS
Original Source Material on Behaviorism from Psychology
as the Behaviorist Views It (1913)
John B. Watson1
Psychology as the behaviorist views it is a purely objective experimental branch of
natural science. Its theoretical goal is the prediction and control of behavior. Introspection forms no essential part of its methods, nor is the scientific value of its data dependent upon the readiness with which they lend themselves to interpretation in
terms of consciousness. The behaviorist, in his efforts to get a unitary scheme of animal response, recognizes no dividing line between man and brute. The behavior of
man, with all of its refinement and complexity, forms only a part of the behaviorist’s
total scheme of investigation.…
I do not wish unduly to criticize psychology. It has failed signally, I believe, during
the fifty-odd years of its existence as an experimental discipline to make its place in
the world as an undisputed natural science. Psychology, as it is generally thought of,
has something esoteric in its methods. If you fail to reproduce my findings, it is not
due to some fault in your apparatus or in the control of your stimulus, but it is due to
the fact that your introspection is untrained. The attack is made upon the observer and
not upon the experimental setting.…
The time seems to have come when psychology must discard all reference to consciousness; when it need no longer delude itself into thinking that it is making mental
states the object of observation. We have become so enmeshed in speculative questions concerning the elements of the mind, the nature of conscious content … that I,
as an experimental student, feel that something is wrong with our premises and the
types of problems which develop from them.…
I firmly believe that two hundred years from now, unless the introspective method
is discarded, psychology will still be divided on the question as to whether auditory
sensations have the quality of extension, whether intensity is an attribute which can
be applied to color, whether there is a difference in texture between image and sensation, and upon many hundreds of other [questions] of like character.…
My psychological quarrel is not with the systematic and structural psychologist
alone. The last fifteen years have seen the growth of what is called functional psychology. This type of psychology decries the use of elements in the static sense of the structuralists. It throws emphasis upon the biological significance of conscious processes
instead of upon the analysis of conscious states into introspectively isolable elements.
I have done my best to understand the difference between functional psychology
and structural psychology. Instead of clarity, confusion grows upon me. The terms
sensation, perception, affection, emotion, volition are used as much by the functionalist as by the structuralist.… Surely if these concepts are elusive when looked at from a
content standpoint, they are still more deceptive when viewed from the angle of function, and especially so when function is obtained by the introspection method.…
I was greatly surprised some time ago when I opened [Walter] Pillsbury’s book and
saw psychology defined as the “science of behavior.” A still more recent text states
that psychology is the “science of mental behavior.” When I saw these promising
statements I thought, now surely we will have texts based upon different lines. After
a few pages the science of behavior is dropped and one finds the conventional treatment of sensation, perception, imagery, and so forth, along with certain shifts in emphasis and additional facts which serve to give the author’s personal imprint.
1
From “Psychology as the Behaviorist Views It,” by J. B. Watson, 1913, Psychological Review, 20, 158–177.
Copyright 1913 by the American Psychological Association. Reprinted by permission.

220

Chapter 10: Behaviorism: The Beginnings

I believe we can write a psychology, define it as Pillsbury, and never go back upon
our definition: never use the terms consciousness, mental states, mind, content, introspectively verifiable, imagery, and the like.… It can be done in terms of stimulus and
response, in terms of habit formation, habit integrations and the like. Furthermore, I
believe that it is really worthwhile to make this attempt now.…
What gives me hope that the behaviorist’s position is a defensible one is the fact
that those branches of psychology which have already partially withdrawn from the
parent, experimental psychology, and which are consequently less dependent upon
introspection are today in a most flourishing condition. Experimental pedagogy, the
psychology of drugs, the psychology of advertising, legal psychology, the psychology
of tests, and psychopathology are all vigorous growths. These are sometimes wrongly
called “practical” or “applied” psychology. Surely there was never a worse misnomer. In the future there may grow up vocational bureaus which really apply psychology. At present these fields are truly scientific and are in search of broad
generalizations which will lead to the control of human behavior.
For example, we find out by experimentation whether a series of stanzas may be
acquired more readily if the whole is learned at once, or whether it is more advantageous
to learn each stanza separately and then pass to the succeeding. We do not attempt to apply
our findings. The application of this principle is purely voluntary on the part of the teacher.
In the psychology of drugs we may show the effect upon behavior of certain doses
of caffeine. We may reach the conclusion that caffeine has a good effect upon the
speed and accuracy of work. But these are general principles. We leave it to the individual as to whether the results of our tests shall be applied or not.
Again, in legal testimony, we test the effects of recency upon the reliability of a witness’s report. We test the accuracy of the report with respect to moving objects, stationary objects, color, and so forth. It depends upon the judicial machinery of the
country to decide whether these facts are ever to be applied.
For a “pure” psychologist to say that he is not interested in the questions raised in
these divisions of the science because they relate indirectly to the application of psychology shows, in the first place, that he fails to understand the scientific aim in such
problems, and secondly, that he is not interested in a psychology which concerns itself with human life. The only fault I have to find with these disciplines is that much
of their material is stated in terms of introspection, whereas a statement in terms of
objective results would be far more valuable. There is no reason why appeal should
ever be made to consciousness in any of them. Or why introspective data should
ever be sought during the experimentation, or published in the results.
The plans which I most favor for psychology lead practically to the ignoring of consciousness in the sense that that term is used by psychologists today. I have virtually denied that this realm of psychics is open to experimental investigation. I don’t wish to go
further into the problem at present because it leads inevitably over into metaphysics. If
you will grant the behaviorist the right to use consciousness in the same way that other
natural scientists employ it—that is, without making consciousness a special object of
observation—you have granted all that my thesis requires.

The Reaction to Watson’s Program
Watson’s attack on the old psychology and his call for a new approach were stirring appeals
for many psychologists. Let us reconsider his major points. Psychology was to be the science of behavior, not the introspective study of consciousness, and a purely objective, experimental natural science. Both human and animal behavior would be investigated, and
psychologists would discard all mentalistic ideas and use only behavior concepts such as
stimulus and response. Psychology’s goal would be the prediction and control of behavior.

The Methods of Behaviorism

221

Despite its appeal to some, however, Watson’s program was not embraced immediately or universally. At first, behaviorism received relatively little attention in the professional journals. Not until the publication of Watson’s 1919 book, Psychology from the
Standpoint of a Behaviorist, did the movement begin to have a significant impact.
One psychologist who disagreed with Watson was Mary Whiton Calkins. Questioning
his rejection of introspection, she spoke for many psychologists who believed that certain
psychological processes could be studied only by introspection. The arguments about introspection persisted for years; Margaret Washburn went so far as to call Watson an enemy of psychology.
Inevitably, support for Watson’s movement grew, particularly among younger psychologists, and by the 1920s universities were offering courses in behaviorism and the
term was becoming acceptable in the professional journals. Among the older psychologists, William McDougall issued a public warning against behaviorism’s popularity, and
E. B. Titchener complained that behaviorism had engulfed the country like a tidal wave.
By 1930, however, Watson could proclaim proudly that behaviorism was so important
that no university could avoid teaching it.
The behaviorism movement did succeed, of course, but the changes Watson called for
in 1913 came about slowly. And when they finally arrived, his was not the only form of
behavioral psychology being promoted.

The Methods of Behaviorism
We have seen that when scientific psychology formally began, it was eager to ally itself
with the older, well-established, and more respectable natural science of physics. The
new psychology tried to adapt natural science methods to its own needs. This tendency
is most obvious with behaviorism.
Watson insisted that psychology restrict itself to the data of the natural sciences,
to what could be observed. To put it simply, psychology must restrict itself to the objective study of behavior. Only the most stringently objective methods of investigation were
acceptable in the behaviorist’s laboratory. To Watson, these methods included the
following:
•
•
•
•

Observation with and without the use of instruments
Testing methods
The verbal report method
The conditioned reflex method

Observation is a necessary basis for the other methods. Objective testing methods
were already in use, but Watson proposed that test results be treated as samples of behavior rather than indicators of mental qualities. To Watson, a test did not measure intelligence or personality; instead, it measured the subject’s responses to the stimulus
situation of taking the test, and nothing more.
Verbal report is more controversial. Because Watson so vocally opposed introspection, his use of verbal reporting in the laboratory left him open to criticism. Some psychologists considered it a weak compromise, saying that he let introspection sneak in the
back door after throwing it out through the front.
Why did Watson allow verbal reports? Despite his aversion to introspection, he could
not ignore the work of psychophysicists that used introspection. Therefore, he suggested
that speech reactions, because they are objectively observable, are as meaningful for behaviorism as any other type of motor response. “Saying is doing—that is, behaving,”
Watson wrote. “Speaking overtly or to ourselves (thinking) is just as objective a type of
behavior as baseball” (Watson, 1930, p. 6).

222

Chapter 10: Behaviorism: The Beginnings

Nevertheless, the verbal report method in behaviorism was a concession widely challenged. Opponents contended that Watson was playing word games, offering merely a
semantic change. Watson countered by agreeing that verbal reports could be imprecise
and were not a satisfactory substitute for objective observation. He restricted their use
to situations in which they could be verified, such as reporting differences between tones.
Unverifiable verbal reports, such as imageless thoughts or accounts of feeling states, were
ruled out.
The conditioned reflex method was adopted by Watson in 1915, two years after behaviorism’s formal founding. Conditioning methods were already in limited use, but Watson was largely responsible for their widespread application in American psychological
research. Watson told psychologist Ernest Hilgard that his interest in conditioned reflexes grew out of his study of Bekhterev’s work, although he later gave credit to Pavlov
as well (Hilgard, 1994).
Watson wrote to his student Karl Lashley in 1915 that the conditioned reflex “works
so beautifully in place of introspection that it deserves to be driven home; we can work
on the human being as we can on animals and from the same point of view” (quoted in
Buckley, 1989, p. 86).
Watson described conditioning in terms of stimulus substitution. A response is conditioned when it becomes attached or connected to a stimulus other than the one that
originally aroused it. (With Pavlov’s dogs, salivation to the sound of a bell instead of to
the sight of food is a conditioned response.) Watson chose this approach because it provided an objective method of analyzing behavior, of reducing it to its elementary units,
the stimulus–response (S-R) bonds. Because all behavior could be reduced to these elements, the conditioned reflex method permitted psychologists to conduct laboratory investigations of complex human behaviors.
Watson was continuing in the atomistic and mechanistic tradition established by the
British empiricists and adopted by the structural psychologists. He intended to study human behavior in the same way the physical scientists were studying the universe, by
breaking it down into its component parts, into its atoms and elements.
This exclusive focus on objective methods, along with the elimination of introspection, meant a change in the nature and role of the human subject in the psychology laboratory. For Wundt and Titchener, subjects were both observer and observed because
they observed their own conscious experience. Their role was clearly much more important than that of the experimenter.
In behaviorism, the subjects themselves became less important. They no longer observed; instead, they were observed by the experimenters. With this change in focus,
the laboratory subjects who used to be called “observers” became commonly known as
“subjects.” The true observers were the experimenters, the research psychologists who
established the experimental conditions and recorded the subjects’ responses.
Thus, human subjects were demoted in status. They no longer actively observed their
own characteristics. They merely behaved—and almost anyone can behave: infants, children,
people with mental and emotional disorders, pigeons, or white laboratory rats. This viewpoint reinforced psychology’s image of people as machines. As one historian noted, “You
put a stimulus in one of the slots and out comes a packet of reactions” (Burt, 1962, p. 232).

The Subject Matter of Behaviorism
The primary subject matter for Watson’s behavioral psychology was the elements of behavior; that is, the body’s muscular movements and glandular secretions. As the science
of behavior, psychology would deal only with acts that could be described objectively,
without using subjective or mentalistic terminology.

The Subject Matter of Behaviorism

223

Despite their stated goal of reducing all behavior to S-R units, ultimately behaviorists
must strive to understand the organism’s total behavior. For example, although a response
can be as simple as a knee jerk, it can also be more complex. Watson called these more
complex responses “acts.” He considered response acts to include such events as eating,
writing, dancing, or constructing a house. In other words, an act involves the organism’s
movement in space. Apparently Watson conceived of response acts in terms of accomplishing some goal that affects one’s environment, rather than as a simple linking of muscular elements. Nevertheless, behavioral acts, no matter how complex, were capable of
being reduced to lower-level motor or glandular responses.
Responses can be either explicit or implicit. Explicit responses are overt and directly
observable. Implicit responses, such as visceral movements, glandular secretions, and
nerve impulses, occur inside the organism. Although not overt, they are still considered
to be behavior. By including implicit responses, Watson was modifying his requirement
that all of psychology’s data be actually observable. He accepted that some items of behavior could be potentially observable. The movements or responses that occur within
the organism are observable through the use of instruments.
Like the responses with which behaviorism deals, the stimuli may be simple or
complex. Light waves striking the eye’s retina are relatively simple stimuli, but stimuli
can also be more complex. Just as the constellation of responses involved in an action
can be reduced to component responses, so the stimulus situation can be resolved
into specific component stimuli. Thus, Watson’s behavioral psychology investigates
the behavior of the whole organism in relation to its environment. Specific laws of
behavior can be proposed by first analyzing the S-R complexes into their elementary
S-R units.
Thus, in both methods and subject matter, Watson’s behaviorism was an attempt to
construct a science free of subjective notions and methods, a science as objective as physics.
Let us consider how Watson treated three major topics: instincts, emotions, and thoughts.
Like all systematic theorists, Watson developed his psychology in accordance with the
underlying belief that all areas of behavior would be considered in objective S-R terms.

Instincts
Initially Watson accepted the role of instincts in behavior. In his book Behavior: An
Introduction to Comparative Psychology (1914), he described 11 instincts, including
one dealing with random behaviors. He had studied instinctive behavior in terns, a species of aquatic bird, in the Dry Tortugas Islands off the Florida coast. Accompanying
him was Karl Lashley, his student at Johns Hopkins University. Lashley claimed that
the expedition was cut short when he and Watson ran out of cigarettes and whiskey.
By 1925 Watson revised his position and eliminated the concept of instinct altogether.
He argued that behaviors that seem instinctive are really socially conditioned responses.
By adopting the view that learning, or conditioning, is the key to understanding all human development, Watson became an extreme environmentalist. And then he went further. Not only did he deny instincts, he refused to admit to his system any inherited
capacities, temperaments, or talents of any kind.
Behaviors that seemed inherited were traced to early childhood training. For example, he argued that children were not born with the ability to be great athletes or musicians but were slanted in that direction by parents or caregivers who encouraged and
reinforced the appropriate behaviors. This emphasis on the overwhelming nurturing
effect of the parental and social environment was one reason for Watson’s phenomenal
popularity. He concluded, simply and optimistically, that children could be trained to
be whatever one wanted them to be. There were no limitations imposed by genetic
factors.

Chapter 10: Behaviorism: The Beginnings

Ferdinand Hamburger Jr. Archives, Johns Hopkins University

224

Watson tests the grasping reflex of an infant. (From a still photo made from a 1919 film.)

Watson was not alone in suggesting that environmental influences were more important
than any traits or potentials we might be born with. It was already becoming popular within
psychology to minimize the role of instincts as behavioral determinants. Thus, Watson’s
position reflected a shift in viewpoint already in progress. In addition, his stand may have
been influenced by the applied orientation of early twentieth-century American psychology.
Psychology could not be applied in ways to alter behavior unless it was accepted that
behavior was capable of being changed. Behaviors governed by forces such as instincts could
not be modified, whereas behaviors dependent on learning or training could.

Emotions
To Watson, emotions were merely physiological responses to specific stimuli. A stimulus
(such as a person suddenly threatening you with bodily harm) produces internal physical
changes such as rapid heart rate along with the appropriate learned overt responses. This
explanation for emotions denies any conscious perception of the emotion or the sensations from the internal organs.
Each emotion involves a particular pattern of physiological changes. Although Watson noted that emotional responses do involve overt movements, he believed that the
internal responses were predominant. Thus, emotion is a form of implicit behavior in
which internal reactions are evident in physical manifestations, such as blushing, perspiration, or increased pulse rate.
Watson’s theory of emotions is less complex than that of William James. In James’s
theory, the bodily changes immediately followed the perception of the stimulus, and the
feeling of those bodily changes was the emotion. Watson criticized James’s position.

The Subject Matter of Behaviorism

225

Discarding the conscious process of perceiving the situation and the feeling state,
Watson claimed that emotions could be described completely in terms of the objective
stimulus situation, the overt bodily response, and the internal physiological changes.
In a now classic study, Watson investigated the stimuli that produce emotional responses in infants. He suggested that infants show three fundamental unlearned emotional response patterns: fear, rage, and love. Fear can be produced by loud noises and
by sudden loss of support. Rage is produced by the restriction of bodily movements.
Love is evoked by caressing the skin or by rocking and patting. Watson also found typical response patterns to these stimuli. Other emotional responses are compounded of
these basic emotions through the conditioning process, and they may become attached
to stimuli that were not originally capable of eliciting them.

Albert, Peter, and the Rabbits

Archives of the History of American Psychology/University of Akron

As we noted at the beginning of this chapter, Watson demonstrated his theory of conditioned emotional responses in his experimental studies of eight-month-old Albert, who
was conditioned to fear a white rat, something he had not feared before the conditioning
trials. From that research Watson concluded that all adult fears, aversions, and anxieties
likewise are conditioned in early childhood. They do not arise, as Freud claimed, from
unconscious conflicts. Watson rejected the whole notion of the unconscious because,
like consciousness, it could not be objectively observed. Initially he was fascinated by
many of Freud’s concepts, but he eventually dismissed psychoanalysis as “voodooism”
(quoted in Rilling, 2000, p. 302).
Watson described the Albert research as preliminary, a pilot study only. Nevertheless,
it has never been successfully replicated. Although psychologists have since noted serious
methodological flaws, the results of the Albert study have been accepted as scientific evidence and are cited in virtually every basic psychology textbook.

Watson watches Little Albert as Watson’s assistant, Rosalie Rayner, holds the child in a sitting position.
The child seems to be reaching for the white rat between his feet. Albert was conditioned to fear the rat
and similar stimuli.

Chapter 10: Behaviorism: The Beginnings

Archives of the History of American Psychology/
University of Akron

226

MARY COVER JONES

Although Albert had been conditioned to fear white rats, rabbits, and Santa Claus masks,
he was no longer available when Watson wanted to try to eliminate those fears. Not long after
starting this research program, Watson left academics. Later, when working in advertising in
New York, he gave a talk about his research. In the audience was Mary Cover Jones (a college
classmate of his wife, Rosalie). Watson’s remarks sparked Jones’s interest, and she wondered
whether the conditioning technique could be used to remove children’s fears. She asked
Rosalie to introduce her to Watson, and then she undertook a study that has since become
another classic in the history of psychology (Jones, 1924).
Her subject was three-year-old Peter, who already showed a fear of rabbits, although
his fear had not been conditioned in the laboratory. While Peter was eating, a rabbit was
brought into the room but kept at a distance great enough so as not to trigger a fearful
response. Over a series of trials lasting several weeks, the rabbit was brought progressively closer, always while the child was eating. Eventually Peter got used to the rabbit
and could touch it without showing fear. Generalized fear responses to similar objects
were also eliminated by this procedure.
Jones’s study has been described as a precursor of behavior therapy (the application of
learning principles to change maladaptive behavior), almost 50 years before the technique became popular. Jones, long associated with the Institute of Child Welfare at the
University of California, Berkeley, received the G. Stanley Hall award in 1968 for her
outstanding contributions to developmental psychology.

Thought Processes
The traditional view of thought processes was that they occurred in the brain “so faintly
that no neural impulse passes out over the motor nerve to the muscle, hence no response
takes place in the muscles and glands” (Watson, 1930, p. 239). According to this theory,
because thought processes occur in the absence of muscular movements, they are not
accessible to observation and experimentation. Thought was regarded as intangible,
something exclusively mental that therefore had no physical reference points (see Bouton,
2009; Hall, 2009).
Watson’s behaviorist system attempted to reduce thinking to implicit motor behavior.
He argued that thought, like all other aspects of human functioning, was a type of sensorimotor behavior. He reasoned that the behavior of thinking must involve implicit
speech reactions or movements. Thus, he reduced thinking to sub-vocal talking that relies on the same muscular habits we learn for overt speech. As we grow up, these muscular habits become inaudible and invisible because our parents and teachers frequently
admonish us to stop talking aloud to ourselves. In this way, thinking becomes a way of
talking silently.
Watson suggested that the focal points for much of this implicit behavior are the
muscles of the tongue and the larynx (the so-called voice box). We also express thought
through gestures such as frowns and shrugs, which are overt reactions to stimuli.
One obvious source of corroboration for Watson’s theory is that most of us are aware
that we do talk to ourselves while we are thinking. A study of college students’ introspective reports found that 73 percent of the thoughts sampled involved talking to themselves
while they were thinking (Farthing, 1992). This kind of evidence, however, is unacceptable to behaviorists precisely because it is introspective, and Watson could hardly depend
on introspection to support his behavioral theory. Behaviorism required objective evidence of implicit speech movements, so he made experimental attempts to record tongue
and larynx movements during thought.
These measurements revealed slight movements some of the time the subjects were
thinking. Measurements from the fingers and hands of hearing-impaired people using
sign language also revealed movements some of the time during thought. Despite his

Behaviorism’s Popular Appeal

227

inability to secure more reliable supportive results, Watson remained convinced of the
existence of implicit speech movements. He insisted that their demonstration awaited
only the development of more sophisticated laboratory equipment.

Behaviorism’s Popular Appeal
Why did Watson’s bold pronouncements win him such a large public following? Surely
most people did not care that some psychologists pretended to be conscious while others
proclaimed psychology had lost its mind, or that some said thinking took place in the
head and others voted for the neck. These issues aroused considerable comment among
psychologists, but they hardly concerned anyone else.
What stirred the public was Watson’s call for a society based on scientifically shaped
and controlled behavior, free of myths, customs, and conventional behaviors. His ideas
offered hope to people disenchanted with old ideas. In fervor and faith, behaviorism
took on aspects of a religion. Among the hundreds of articles and books written about
Watson’s behaviorism was The Religion Called Behaviorism (Berman, 1927), soon to be
read by a 23-year-old man named B. F. Skinner, who wrote a review of the book and
sent it to a popular literary magazine. “They did not publish [my review], but in writing
it I was more or less defining myself for the first time as a behaviorist” (Skinner, 1976,
p. 299). Skinner would go on to refine and extend Watson’s work (see Chapter 11).
Some of the excitement generated by Watson’s ideas is evident in the newspaper comments on his book Behaviorism (1925). The New York Times declared, “It marks an
epoch in the intellectual history of man” (August 2, 1925). The New York Herald Tribune
called it “the most important book ever written. One stands for an instant blinded with a
great hope” (June 21, 1925).
The hope stemmed from Watson’s emphasis on the nurturing effect of the childhood
environment in determining behavior and from his minimization of the impact of inherited tendencies. The following paragraph from Behaviorism is frequently quoted to support his point:
Give me a dozen healthy infants, well-formed, and my own specified world to bring
them up in, and I’ll guarantee to take any one at random and train him to become
any type of specialist I might select—doctor, lawyer, artist, merchant-chief, and, yes,
even beggar-man and thief, regardless of his talents, penchants, tendencies, abilities,
vocations, and race of his ancestors. (Watson, 1930, p. 104)
Watson’s conditioned reflex experiments, such as the Albert study, persuaded him
that emotional disturbances in adulthood are caused by conditioned responses established in infancy, childhood, and adolescence. If adult disturbances are a function of
faulty childhood conditioning, then a proper program of childhood conditioning should
prevent the emergence of adult disorders. Watson believed this kind of practical control
over childhood behavior (and hence over the later adult behavior) was not only possible
but absolutely necessary. He developed a plan for improving society, a program of experimental ethics, based on the principles of behaviorism.
No one gave him a dozen healthy infants so he could test his claim, and he later admitted that in making it he was going beyond the facts. However, he noted that people
who disagreed with him and believed the impact of heredity was greater than that of the
environment had been stating their case for thousands of years and still had no real evidence for their view.
The following passage from Behaviorism shows the vitality with which Watson described his program for living under a behaviorist system. It may help you appreciate
why so many people adopted behaviorism as a new faith.

228

Chapter 10: Behaviorism: The Beginnings

Behaviorism ought to be a science that prepares men and women for understanding the
principles of their own behavior. It ought to make men and women eager to rearrange
their own lives, and especially eager to prepare themselves to bring up their own children in a healthy way. I wish I could picture for you what a rich and wonderful individual we should make of every healthy child if only we could let it shape itself properly
and then provide for it a universe in which it could exercise that organization—a universe unshackled by legendary folklore of happenings thousands of years ago; unhampered by disgraceful political history; free of foolish customs and conventions which
have no significance in themselves, yet which hem the individual in like taut steel
bands.
I am not asking here for revolution; I am not asking people to go out to some Godforsaken place, form a colony, go naked and live a communal life, nor am I asking for a
change to a diet of roots and herbs. I am not asking for “free love.” I am trying to dangle a stimulus in front of you, a verbal stimulus which, if acted upon, will gradually
change this universe. For the universe will change if you bring up your children, not
in the freedom of the libertine, but in behavioristic freedom—a freedom which we cannot even picture in words, so little do we know of it. Will not these children in turn,
with their better ways of living and thinking, replace us as society and in turn bring
up their children in a still more scientific way, until the world finally becomes a place
fit for human habitation? (Watson, 1930, pp. 303–304)
Watson’s plan to replace religion-based ethics with his experimental ethics based on
behaviorism remained only a hope and was never carried out. He outlined his program
and left it as a framework for others. Years later, B. F. Skinner (see Chapter 11) conceived in greater detail a scientifically shaped utopia in the spirit of Watson’s ideas.

An Outbreak of Psychology
By the 1920s the field of psychology had captured and captivated the public’s attention.
Given Watson’s charisma, personal charm, persuasiveness, and message of hope, Americans were enthralled by what one writer called an “outbreak” of psychology. Much of
the public was convinced that psychology provided the path to health, happiness, and
prosperity. Psychological advice columns sprouted up in the pages of the daily
newspapers.
Psychologist Joseph Jastrow (1863–1944) was once called “the most prolific
university-trained popular psychologist” in the United States during the 1920s and
1930s (Pettit, 2007, p. 162). He received his Ph.D. in 1886 from Johns Hopkins and
pursued a lengthy academic career at the University of Wisconsin. He also wrote magazine articles about psychology, acting on his belief that the “popularization of psychology was essential to its public appreciation and official support” (Jastrow, 1930/1961,
p. 150). Topics included curing the blues, the psychology of crooks, fears and worries,
the meaning of IQ scores, inferiority complexes, family conflicts, and why we drink
coffee. Obviously psychology had come a long way from the laboratory work of Wundt
and Titchener.
Jastrow’s newspaper column, “Keeping Mentally Fit,” was syndicated in 150 papers,
and he participated in radio programs such as “Herald of Sanity” and “Women’s Radio
Review.” He wrote a pop psychology manual, Piloting Your Life: The Psychologist as
Helmsman, not unlike the self-help books perpetually on today’s best-seller lists. His articles on the usefulness of psychology in everyday life appeared frequently in popular
magazines such as Popular Science Monthly, Cosmopolitan, and Harper’s (Behrens,
2009; Hull, 1944).

Criticisms of Watson’s Behaviorism

229

Another promoter of psychology was Albert Wiggam. Although not a psychologist, he
wrote a popular newspaper column called “Exploring Your Mind.” Following is a sample
of his views:
Men and women never needed psychology so much as they need it today. Young men
and women need it in order to measure their own mental traits and capacities with a
view to choosing their careers early and wisely. Businessmen need it to help them select
employees; parents and educators need it as an aid in rearing and educating children;
all need it in order to secure the highest effectiveness and happiness.
You cannot achieve these things in the fullest measure without the new knowledge
of your own mind and personality that the psychologists have given us. (Wiggam, 1928,
quoted in Benjamin, 1986, p. 943)
The Canadian humorist Stephen Butler Leacock noted that psychology had once been
safely confined to college campuses, where it had no connection with reality and did no
visible harm to anyone who studied it. By 1924, however, psychology was everywhere.
Leacock wrote, “For almost every juncture of life we now call in the services of an expert
psychologist as naturally as we send for an emergency plumber. In all our great cities
there are already, or soon will be, signs that read ‘Psychologist—Open Day and Night’”
(quoted in Benjamin, 1986, p. 944).
Thus was psychology welcomed throughout the United States, and John B. Watson
may have done more than any other individual to help it spread.

Criticisms of Watson’s Behaviorism

Archives of the History of American Psychology/
University of Akron

Any system that proposes sweeping revisions, blatantly attacks the existing order, and
suggests that the earlier version of the truth be discarded is sure to be criticized. We
know that American psychology was already moving toward greater objectivity when
Watson founded behaviorism, but not all psychologists were ready to accept the extreme
objectivity that Watson proposed. Many psychologists, including some who supported
the principle of objectivity, believed that Watson’s program omitted important components such as sensory and perceptual processes.

Karl Lashley (1890–1958)

KARL LASHLEY

Law of mass action:
The efficiency of
learning is a function
of the total mass of
cortical tissue.
Equipotentiality: The
idea that one part of
the cerebral cortex is
essentially equal to
another in its contribution to learning.

Lashley was a student of Watson’s at Johns Hopkins, where he earned his Ph.D. His career as a physiological psychologist took him to the universities of Minnesota and Chicago, to Harvard, and finally to the Yerkes Laboratory of Primate Biology. He upheld the
mechanistic tradition that had characterized psychology since its founding.
Lashley revealed that as a boy he was as baffled by people as he was skillful with mechano sets [toys for making mechanical constructions such as buildings and bridges].
Psychology finally fell open to him, he said, when he recognized that human beings
and machines had a great deal in common. (Murray, quoted in Robinson, 1992, p. 213)
Lashley was an advocate of Watson’s behaviorism, though his research on brain mechanisms in rats challenged one of Watson’s basic points. Lashley summarized his findings in Brain Mechanisms and Intelligence (1929). He offered two now famous principles:
the law of mass action, which states that the efficiency of learning is a function of the
intact mass of the cortex (the more cortical tissue available, the better the learning), and
the principle of equipotentiality, which states that one part of the cortex is essentially
equal to another in terms of its contribution to learning.
Lashley expected his research to lead him to specific sensory and motor centers in the
cerebral cortex as well as corresponding connections between sensory and motor

230

Chapter 10: Behaviorism: The Beginnings

Archives of the History of American Psychology/
University of Akron

apparatus. Such findings would have supported the primacy and simplicity of the reflex
arc as an elemental unit of behavior. What happened, however, was that his results challenged Watson’s idea of a simple point-to-point connection in reflexes, according to
which the brain serves merely to switch incoming sensory nerve impulses into outgoing
motor impulses. Lashley’s findings suggested that the brain plays a more active role in
learning than Watson could accept. Thus, Lashley contested Watson’s assumption that
behavior is compounded bit by bit solely through conditioned reflexes.
Although Lashley’s work discredited a fundamental part of Watson’s system, it did
not weaken the behaviorist insistence on objective research methods. On the contrary,
Lashley’s work confirmed the value of objective methods in psychological research.

WILLIAM MCDOUGALL

William McDougall (1871–1938)
One of Watson’s more forceful opponents was William McDougall, an English psychologist who came to the United States in 1920, first to Harvard and later to Duke University. McDougall is known for his instinct theory of behavior and for the impetus his
book on social psychology gave to that area (McDougall, 1908).
McDougall, who contributed so much to social psychology, was not very social himself. He wrote:
I have never fitted neatly into any social group, never been able to find myself wholly at
one with any party or any system; and, though not insensible to the attractions of
group life, group feeling and thinking, have always stood outside, critical and illcontent. (1930, p. 192)
He was a supporter of unpopular causes such as free will, Nordic superiority, and psychic research, and he was frequently denounced by the American press for his views.
McDougall was also vilified in the psychological community because he strongly criticized behaviorism in the 1920s, when most psychologists had accepted its influence. Indeed, McDougall and Watson had been “flaying each other in print for years” (Larson,
1972, p. 3).
McDougall wrote that he “suffered much in the way of loss of reputation, unpopularity, slanderous misrepresentation, and scornful hostility” (quoted in Innis, 2003, p. 102).
One American psychologist went so far as to say publicly, when McDougall was seriously
ill, that psychology would be better off if he died. On a more sympathetic note, Robert
Yerkes referred to McDougall’s life as “a major tragedy” (Innis, 2003, p. 91).
McDougall’s instinct theory states that human behavior derives from innate tendencies to thought and action. Although this idea was initially well received, it rapidly lost
ground to behaviorism. Watson rejected the notion of instincts, and on this issue and
many others the two men clashed.

The Watson–McDougall Debate
Watson and McDougall met to debate their differences on February 5, 1924, at the Psychology Club in Washington, D.C. The fact that Washington had a psychology club not
affiliated with a university attests to the field’s widespread popularity. One thousand people attended the proceedings. Only a few were psychologists; at the time there were only
464 APA members nationwide. Thus, the size of the crowd also reflects the popularity of
Watson’s behaviorism. The judges of the debate, however, voted McDougall the winner.
The arguments were published jointly in The Battle of Behaviorism (1929).
McDougall began optimistically. “I have an initial advantage over Dr. Watson,” he
said, “an advantage which I feel to be so great as to be unfair; namely, all persons of
common sense will of necessity be on my side from the outset” (Watson & McDougall,

Contributions of Watson’s Behaviorism

231

1929, p. 40). McDougall agreed with Watson that the data of behavior are a proper focus
for psychological research, but he argued that the data of consciousness are also indispensable. (This position was later upheld by humanistic psychologists and sociallearning theorists.)
If psychologists do not use introspection, McDougall asked, how can they determine
the meaning of a subject’s response or the accuracy of speech behavior (what Watson
called verbal report)? Without self-report, how can we know anything about daydreams
and fantasies? How can we understand or appreciate aesthetic experiences? McDougall
challenged Watson to explain how a behaviorist would account for the experience of enjoying a violin concert. McDougall said:
I come into this hall and see a man on this platform scraping the guts of a cat with
hairs from the tail of a horse, and, sitting silently in attitudes of rapt attention, are a
thousand persons, who presently break into wild applause. How will the behaviorist explain these strange incidents? How explain the fact that the vibrations emitted by the
catgut stimulate all the thousands into absolute silence and quiescence, and the further
fact that the cessation of the stimulus seems to be a stimulus to the most frantic
activity?
Common sense and psychology agree in accepting the explanation that the audience heard the music with keen pleasure, and vented their gratitude and admiration
for the artist in shouts and handclappings. But the behaviorist knows nothing of pleasure and pain, of admiration and gratitude. He has relegated all such “metaphysical
entities” to the dust heap, and must seek some other explanation. Let us leave him seeking it. The search will keep him harmlessly occupied for some centuries to come. (Watson & McDougall, 1929, pp. 62–63)
Then McDougall questioned Watson’s assumption that human behavior is fully determined, that everything we do is the direct result of past experience and can be predicted
once these past events are known. Such a psychology leaves no room for free will or freedom of choice. If this determinist position were true—that humans have no free will and
therefore cannot be held responsible for their actions—then there would be no human
initiative, no creative effort, no desire to improve ourselves or society. No one would attempt to prevent war, alleviate injustice, or achieve any personal or social ideal. Why
even bother trying, if every thought and behavior is totally determined by past
experience?
Watson’s use of the verbal report method came under fire. He was charged with being
inconsistent, accepting it when it could be verified and rejecting it when it could not. Of
course, that was Watson’s point and the goal of the entire behaviorist movement: to use
only data that could be verified.
The Watson–McDougall debate came 11 years after Watson formally founded the behaviorist school of thought. McDougall predicted that in a few more years Watson’s position would disappear without a trace. Five years later McDougall wrote that his forecast
had been too rosy, “founded upon a too generous estimate of the intelligence of the
American public. Dr. Watson continues, as a prophet of much honor in his own country, to issue his pronouncements” (Watson & McDougall, 1929, pp. 86, 87).

Contributions of Watson’s Behaviorism
Watson’s productive career in psychology lasted fewer than 20 years, but he profoundly
affected the course of psychology’s development for many years to come. He was an effective agent of the Zeitgeist, of the times that were changing not only in psychology but
in general scientific attitudes as well. The nineteenth century had witnessed magnificent

232

Chapter 10: Behaviorism: The Beginnings

advances in every branch of science. The twentieth century promised even more marvels.
It was thought then that scientists, if given enough time, would find solutions to every
problem, answers to every question.
Watson made psychology more objective in methods and terminology. Although his
positions on specific topics stimulated much research, his original formulations are no
longer useful. As a distinct school of thought, Watsonian behaviorism was replaced by
other forms of psychological objectivism that built on it, as we see in Chapter 11. The
historian E. G. Boring said in 1929 that behaviorism was already past its prime. Because
revolutionary movements depend on protest for their strength, it is an effective tribute to
Watson’s behaviorism that just 16 years after its introduction it no longer needed to protest. Indeed, there was nothing left to protest against.
Watson’s behaviorism effectively overcame the earlier mainstream positions in psychology. A graduate student at the University of Wisconsin in 1926 reported that by
then, few students had heard of Wundt and Titchener (Gengerelli, 1976). Objective
methods and language became identified with American psychology, and so Watson’s
system died, as have other successful movements, by being absorbed into the main
body of thought to provide a strong conceptual base for modern psychology.
Although Watson’s program did not realize its ambitious goals, he is widely recognized
for his founding role. The centennial of his birth was celebrated in April 1979, the same
year as the centennial of the birth of psychology as a science. A symposium at Furman
University, where the psychology laboratory is named for Watson, drew psychologists
from throughout the United States. One speaker was B. F. Skinner, whose talk was titled
“What J. B. Watson Meant to Me.” Hometown residents remembered Watson somewhat
less favorably. Many recalled him as “an upstart and an atheist who had turned his back
on his Southern heritage and Baptist upbringing” (Greenville News, April 5, 1979). In 1984,
a commemorative marker was placed on the highway near his birthplace.
To some degree, the acceptance of Watsonian behaviorism was a function of Watson’s personality. A charismatic figure, he projected his ideas with enthusiasm, optimism,
and self-confidence. He was a strong and appealing speaker who scorned tradition and
rejected the current psychology. These personal qualities, plus the spirit of the times he
so ably manipulated, define John B. Watson as one of psychology’s pioneers.

Discussion Questions
1.
2.

3.

4.

5.

What ethical and moral considerations do you
think were involved in the Little Albert study?
How did Watson establish a conditioned emotional response in Albert? Did that response
generalize to other stimuli? If so, to what kind
of stimuli?
Was Watson concerned about the practical value of
behaviorism? If your answer is yes, to what areas
of everyday life did he apply his findings?
Describe Watson’s approach to child rearing.
What were the results of that approach within his
family?
In Watson’s 1913 article, what criticisms did he
make of structuralism and functionalism? On
what basis did he argue that applied psychology
could be called scientific?

6.
7.
8.
9.

10.

11.

How were Watson’s ideas received by the younger generation of psychologists?
What research methods did Watson accept for a
scientific psychology?
Why was Watson’s use of verbal reports considered to be controversial?
How did the behaviorists’ view of the role and
task of human subjects differ from that of the
introspectionists?
Discuss how Watson’s subject matter and methodology continued the atomistic, mechanistic,
empiricistic tradition.
How did Watson distinguish between responses
and acts? How did he distinguish between explicit and implicit responses?

Recommended Resources

Describe Watson’s views on instinct and thought
processes.
13. How do the studies of Albert and Peter support
Watson’s ideas on the role of learning in
emotion?
14. Explain the reasons for behaviorism’s popular
appeal.
15. Describe Lashley’s law of mass action and principle of equipotentiality.
12.

16.
17.

18.

233

In what way did Lashley’s research results discredit a portion of Watson’s system?
Do you think Watson’s behaviorism would have
become so popular without the earlier work of the
functional psychologists? Explain your answer.
On what grounds did McDougall criticize Watson’s form of behaviorism?

Recommended Resources
Brewer, C. L. (1991). Perspectives on John B. Watson.
In G. A. Kimble, M. Wertheimer, & C. White (Eds.),
Portraits of pioneers in psychology (pp. 171–186).
Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Reviews Watson’s life and his contributions to psychology and notes Furman University’s efforts to
acknowledge Watson’s importance.
Buckley, K. W. (1989). Mechanical man: John Broadus
Watson and the beginnings of behaviorism. New
York: Guilford.
Describes Watson’s academic and business careers
and his role as a popularizer of psychology.
Duke, C., Fried, S., Pliley, W., & Walker, D. (1989).
Rosalie Rayner Watson: The mother of a behaviorist’s
sons. Psychological Reports, 65, 163–169.
Describes Watson’s wife, who coauthored the study
of conditioned emotional reactions and assisted in
the preparation of Watson’s book on child care.

Hannush, M. J. (1987). John B. Watson remembered:
An interview with James B. Watson. Journal of the
History of the Behavioral Sciences, 23, 137–152.
An interview with the son of John B. Watson and
Rosalie Rayner Watson, in an effort to link the
psychologist’s life with the theory he promoted.
Jastrow, J. (1961). Autobiography. In C. Murchison
(Ed.), A history of psychology in autobiography (Vol.
1, pp. 135–162). New York: Russell & Russell.
(Original work published 1930)
Includes Jastrow’s views on the popularization of
psychology.
Samelson, F. (1981). Struggle for scientific authority:
The reception of Watson’s behaviorism, 1913–1920.
Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 17,
399–425.
Reports the impact of Watson’s ideas after the
publication of his behaviorist manifesto.

CHAPTER

11

Behaviorism: After the Founding

The IQ Zoo
Three Stages of
Behaviorism
Operationism
Edward Chace Tolman
(1886–1959)
Purposive Behaviorism
Intervening Variables
Learning Theory
Comment
Clark Leonard Hull
(1884–1952)
Hull’s Life
The Spirit of Mechanism
Objective Methodology
and Quantification
Drives
Learning
Comment
B. F. Skinner (1904–1990)
Skinner’s Life
Skinner’s Behaviorism
Operant Conditioning
Schedules of
Reinforcement
Successive
Approximation: The
Shaping of Behavior
Aircribs, Teaching
Machines, and
Pigeon-Guided Missiles
Walden Two—A
Behaviorist Society
Behavior Modification
Criticisms of Skinner’s
Behaviorism
Contributions of
Skinner’s Behaviorism
Sociobehaviorism: The
Cognitive Challenge
Albert Bandura (1925– )
Social Cognitive Theory

234

The IQ Zoo
It was called the IQ Zoo, located in Hot Springs, Arkansas. It’s closed now, but for
35 years thousands of people visited it to watch animals perform an amazing variety of
tricks. At least they looked like tricks, but in reality every animal had been carefully
trained. Nothing had been left to chance at the IQ Zoo. Each animal you saw—whether
a pigeon or a chicken or a raccoon—had become another Clever Hans (see Bailey &
Gillaspy, 2005).
Consider Priscilla the Fastidious Pig. If you have ever seen pigs in a barnyard you might
not think they were capable of doing anything exciting enough to make you watch. Priscilla, however, was fascinating. She performed a routine about getting up in the morning.
First she switched on a radio, then ate breakfast at a table, picked up an array of dirty
clothes, stowed them in a hamper, and ran a vacuum cleaner around her room. Once she
was ready to face her public, she proceeded to answer questions put to her by the audience
by activating signs that lit up to indicate “yes” or “no.”
Another star of the IQ Zoo was Bird Brain, a chicken who played Tic-Tac-Toe with
people and would invariably win or tie every game. She never lost, not even when she
played against the great psychologist B. F. Skinner, whose reaction to losing to a chicken
went unrecorded. At one time there were hundreds of chickens like Bird Brain featured
at exhibitions and casinos throughout the United States, and not one ever lost a game to
a human opponent.
In addition to Bird Brain, a “hen played a 5-note tune on a small piano, another performed a ‘tap dance’ in costume and shoes, while a third ‘laid’ wooden eggs in a nest box;
the eggs rolled down a trough into a basket. The audience could call out any number of
eggs desired, up to eight, and the hen would lay that number, nonstop” (Breland &
Breland, 1951, p. 202).
There were chickens that walked tightropes, played baseball and poker, and fired popguns. Rabbits drove little fire trucks around the grounds, sirens wailing. Ducks played
pianos and drums, parrots rode bicycles, and raccoons played basketball. And who could
forget the dancing goat, the hamsters swinging on the trapeze, and the kissing rabbits
(Joyce & Baker, 2008; Time, February 28, 1955)?
The zoo was established in 1955 by Keller and Marian Breland, former graduate students in psychology who left the university to earn a living by applying psychological
conditioning techniques to animal behavior. They met when Marian, whose family called
her “Mouse” because of her diminutive stature, literally ran into Keller one day when she
was rushing out of the psychology laboratory to seek medical treatment because she had
been bitten by a lab rat.

Operationism

Self-Efficacy
Behavior Modification
Comment
Julian Rotter (1916– )
Cognitive Processes
Locus of Control
Comment
The Fate of Behaviorism
Discussion Questions
Recommended Resources

235

A year later they married, and in 1943 they formed Animal Behavior Enterprise to
train animals to perform at state fairs and tourist attractions. By the time they opened
the IQ Zoo their work was well known, thanks to articles in the Wall Street Journal,
Time, Life, and Reader’s Digest. At the peak of their success the Brelands were running
nearly 140 trained-animal shows at major tourist attractions and twice that many in
traveling animal shows. They had also trained hundreds of animals for roles in movies,
television programs, and commercials. Overall they trained more than 6,000 animals of
some 150 species (Marr, 2002).
And they did it all through the use of the basic conditioning techniques they had
learned from B. F. Skinner, the leading behaviorist of the twentieth century.

Three Stages of Behaviorism
John B. Watson’s intended revolution did not transform psychology overnight. It took
more time than he expected. Yet by 1924, little more than a decade after he formally
launched behaviorism, even Titchener, Watson’s greatest opponent, conceded that behaviorism had engulfed American psychology. By 1930 Watson was able to proclaim
with considerable justification that his victory was complete.
Watson’s behaviorism was the first stage in the evolution of the behavioral school of
thought. The second stage, neobehaviorism, dates from 1930 to about 1960 and includes
the work of Tolman, Hull, and Skinner. These neobehaviorists agreed on several points,
as follows:
•
•
•

The core of psychology is the study of learning.
Most behavior, no matter how complex, can be accounted for by the laws of
conditioning.
Psychology must adopt the principle of operationism.

The third stage in behaviorism’s evolution, neo-neobehaviorism or sociobehaviorism,
dates from about 1960 to about 1990. This stage includes the work of Bandura and
Rotter and is distinguished by a return to the consideration of cognitive processes while
maintaining a focus on the observation of overt behavior.

Operationism
Operationism: The
doctrine that a physical
concept can be defined in precise terms
related to the set of
operations or procedures by which it is
determined.

The purpose of operationism, which was a major characteristic of neobehaviorism, was
to render the language and terminology of science more objective and precise and to rid
science of “pseudoproblems”; that is, those problems that are not actually observable or
physically demonstrable. Operationism holds that the validity of any scientific finding or
theoretical construct depends on the validity of the operations used in arriving at that
finding.
The operationist viewpoint was promoted by Percy W. Bridgman (1882–1961), a
Nobel Prize-winning physicist at Harvard University. His book, The Logic of Modern
Physics (1927), captured the attention of many psychologists (Feest, 2005). Bridgman
insisted that physical concepts be defined precisely and that all concepts lacking physical
referents be discarded.
We may illustrate by considering the concept of length. What do we mean by the length
of an object? We evidently know what we mean by length if we can tell what the length
of any and every object is, and for the physicist nothing more is required. To find the
length of an object, we have to perform certain physical operations. The concept of
length is therefore fixed when the operations by which length is measured are fixed;

236

Chapter 11: Behaviorism: After the Founding

that is, the concept of length involves as much as and nothing more than a set of operations; the concept is synonymous with the corresponding set of operations. (Bridgman,
1927, p. 5)
Thus, a physical concept is the same as the set of operations or procedures by which it is
determined. Many psychologists believed this principle would be useful for their work
and were eager to apply it.
Bridgman’s insistence on discarding pseudo-problems—those questions that defy answer by any known objective test—was particularly appealing to behavioral psychologists.
Propositions that cannot be put to experimental test, such as the existence and nature of
the soul, are meaningless for science. What is the soul? How can it be observed in the
laboratory? Can it be measured and manipulated under controlled conditions to determine its effects on behavior? If not, then the concept has no use or meaning or relevance
for science.
Following this reasoning, the concept of individual or private conscious experience is
also a pseudo-problem for the science of psychology. The existence or characteristics of
consciousness cannot be determined or even investigated by objective methods. According
to the operationist viewpoint, then, consciousness has no place in a scientific psychology.
Critics suggested that operationism was little more than a formal statement of principles
already being applied by psychologists to define ideas and concepts in relation to their
physical referents. There is little in Bridgman’s book on operationism that cannot be traced
to the works of the British empiricists. The long-term trend in American psychology was,
as we have seen, toward greater objectivity in methodology and subject matter, so it can be
said that the operationist approach to research and theory had already been accepted by
many psychologists.
Since the days of Wilhelm Wundt in Germany, however, physics had been the paragon of scientific respectability for the newer psychology. When physicists proclaimed
their acceptance of operationism as a formal doctrine, many psychologists felt compelled
to follow this role model. Eventually, psychologists used operationism more extensively
than did physicists. As a result, the generation of neobehaviorists that came of age in the
late 1920s and 1930s, including B. F. Skinner, incorporated operationism in their approach to psychology (Moore, 2005).
Bridgman lived long enough to witness not only psychology’s embrace of operationism but also the later discarding of his approach. At the age of 79, knowing he was terminally ill, Bridgman completed the index to a seven-volume edition of his collected
writings, mailed it to the publisher, and shot himself. He had feared that if he waited
any longer, he would become incapacitated and unable to take such action. In his suicide
note he wrote, “Probably, this is the last day I will be able to do it myself” (quoted in
Nuland, 1994, p. 152).
Archives of the History of American Psychology/
University of Akron

Edward Chace Tolman (1886–1959)

EDWARD CHACE
TOLMAN

One of the early converts to behaviorism, Edward Tolman studied engineering at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He switched to psychology and received his
Ph.D. from Harvard in 1915. In the summer of 1912, Tolman studied in Germany with
the Gestalt psychologist Kurt Koffka. In Tolman’s final year of graduate school, he became acquainted with Watson’s new behaviorism. Having been trained in the tradition
of Titchener’s structural psychology, Tolman was already questioning the scientific usefulness of introspection. In his autobiography, he recalled that Watson’s behaviorism
came as a “tremendous stimulus and relief” (1952, p. 326).
Tolman became an instructor at Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois, and in
1918 he took a new position at the University of California at Berkeley. It was at Berkeley

Edward Chace Tolman (1886–1959)

237

where he taught comparative psychology and conducted research on learning in rats, and
soon afterwards he became dissatisfied with Watson’s form of behaviorism and began to
develop his own. During World War II, Tolman served with the Office of Strategic Services (the OSS, the forerunner of the Central Intelligence Agency). In the early 1950s, he
helped lead faculty opposition to the California state loyalty oath.

Purposive Behaviorism
Purposive
behaviorism: Tolman’s
system combining the
objective study of behavior with the consideration of
purposiveness or goal
orientation in behavior.

Tolman’s approach to behaviorism is presented in his book, Purposive Behavior in Animals
and Men (1932). His term purposive behaviorism may appear at first glance to be a curious amalgam of two contradictory ideas: purpose and behavior. Attributing purpose to an
organism’s behavior seems to imply consciousness, a mentalistic concept that has no place
in a behavioral psychology. Tolman made it clear, however, that he was very much the
behaviorist in subject matter and methodology. He was not urging psychology to accept
consciousness. Like Watson, he rejected introspection and had no interest in presumed internal experiences that were not accessible to objective observation.
Tolman argued that purposiveness in behavior can be defined in objective behavioral
terms without resorting to introspection or to reports about how one may feel about an
experience. It seemed obvious to Tolman that all actions were goal-directed. For example, a cat tries to find its way out of the psychologist’s experimental puzzle box, a rat tries
to master the maze, and a child tries to learn to play the piano or to kick a soccer ball.
In other words, Tolman said, behavior “reeks” of purpose and is oriented toward
achieving a goal or learning the means to an end. The rat persistently runs the maze,
making fewer errors each time, to reach the goal faster. What is happening in this case
is that the rat is learning, and the fact of learning, whether in animal subjects or humans,
is objective behavioral evidence of purpose. Note that Tolman is dealing with the objective responses of the organism and that the measurements are stated in terms of changes
in response behavior as a function of learning. These are measures that yield objective
data.
Watsonian behaviorists were quick to criticize the attribution of purpose to behavior.
They insisted that any reference to purposiveness implied recognition of conscious processes. Tolman responded that it made no difference to him whether the person or the
animal was conscious. The conscious experience—if there was any—associated with purposive behavior did not influence the organism’s behavioral responses. And Tolman was
interested only in overt responses.

Intervening Variables

Intervening variables:
Unobserved and inferred factors within
the organism that are
the actual determinants of behavior.

As a behaviorist, Tolman believed that both the initiating causes of behavior and the
final resulting behavior must be capable of objective observation and operational definition. He listed five independent variables as causes of behavior: environmental stimuli,
physiological drives, heredity, previous training, and age. Behavior is a function of these
five variables, an idea Tolman expressed in a mathematical equation.
Between these observable independent variables and the resulting response behavior
(the observable dependent variable), Tolman inferred a set of unobservable factors, the
intervening variables, which are the actual determinants of behavior. These factors are internal processes that connect the stimulus situation with the observed response. The behaviorists’ S-R proposition (for stimulus-response) should read S-O-R, so far as Tolman was
concerned. The intervening variable is whatever is going on within O (the organism) that
brings about the behavioral response to a given stimulus situation. But because intervening
variables cannot be objectively observed, they are of no use to psychology unless they can
be directly related to the experimental (independent) variables and the behavior (dependent) variable.

238

Chapter 11: Behaviorism: After the Founding

The classic example of an intervening variable is hunger. We cannot actually see hunger in a person or a laboratory animal, but hunger can be precisely and objectively related to an experimental variable, such as the length of time since the organism last
received food. Hunger can also be related to an objective response or behavior variable,
such as the amount of food consumed or the speed with which it was eaten. Thus, the
unobservable variable of hunger can be described precisely in relation to empirical variables and made amenable to quantification and experimental manipulation.
By specifying the independent and dependent variables, which are observable events,
Tolman was able to provide operational definitions of unobservable, internal states. He
initially referred to his approach, in general, as operational behaviorism before selecting
the more precise term “intervening variable.”

Learning Theory
The problem of learning formed a major part of Tolman’s purposive behaviorism. He
rejected Thorndike’s law of effect, saying that reward or reinforcement has little influence
on learning. In its place, Tolman proposed a cognitive explanation for learning, suggesting that the repeated performance of a task strengthens the learned relationship between
environmental cues and the organism’s expectations. In this way, the organism gets to
know its environment. Tolman called these learned relationships “sign Gestalts” and posited that they are built up by the continued performance of a task.
Let us watch a hungry rat in a maze. The rat moves about in the maze, exploring
correct alleys and blind alleys. Eventually the rat discovers food. In subsequent trials in
the maze, the goal (finding food) gives purpose and direction to the rat’s behavior. Expectations are established at each choice point, and the rat comes to expect that certain
cues associated with the choice point will or will not lead to the food.
When the rat’s expectation is confirmed and it obtains food, the sign Gestalt (the cue
expectancy associated with a particular choice point) is strengthened. For all the choice
points in the maze, then, the animal establishes a cognitive map, which is a pattern of
sign Gestalts. This pattern is what the animal learns—that is, the map of the maze, not
merely a set of motor habits. The rat’s brain forms a comprehensive picture of the maze
or of any familiar environment, enabling it to go from one place to another without being restricted to a fixed series of bodily movements. Tolman concluded that the same
phenomenon occurs with people familiar with their neighborhood or town. They can
go from one point to another by several routes because of the cognitive map they have
developed of the area.

Comment
Tolman is recognized as a forerunner of contemporary cognitive psychology (see Chapter 15), and his work had a great impact, especially his research on problems of learning
and his concept of the intervening variable. Because intervening variables are a way of
operationally defining unobservable internal states, they made such states respectable
subjects for scientific study. Intervening variables were used by neobehaviorists such as
Hull and Skinner.
Another significant contribution was Tolman’s wholehearted support for the rat as an
appropriate subject for psychological study. At the start of his career, Tolman was not
enthusiastic. He said about rats, “I don’t like them. They make me feel creepy” (Tolman,
1919, quoted in Innis, 1992, p. 191).
By 1945, his attitude had changed:
Let it be noted that rats live in cages; they do not go on binges the night before one has
planned an experiment; they do not kill each other off in wars; they do not invent

Clark Leonard Hull (1884–1952)

239

engines of destruction, and, if they did, they would not be so inept about controlling
such engines; they do not go in for either class conflicts or race conflicts; they avoid politics, economics, and papers on psychology. They are marvelous, pure, and delightful.
(Tolman, 1945, p. 166)
Thanks to the work of Tolman and others, the white rat became the primary research
subject for the neobehaviorists and learning theorists from 1930 until the 1960s. It was
assumed that research on white rats would yield insights into the basic processes underlying the behavior not only of rats but also of other animals and humans as well. Tolman
wrote that “everything important in psychology can be investigated in essence through
the continued experimental and theoretical analysis of the determiners of rat behavior
at a choice point in a maze” (quoted in Innis, 2000, p. 92). Who needed human subjects
when so many white rats were available?
Archives of the History of American Psychology/
University of Akron

Clark Leonard Hull (1884–1952)
Clark Hull and his followers dominated American psychology from the 1940s until the
1960s. Perhaps no other psychologist was so devoted to the problems of the scientific
method. Hull had a prodigious command of mathematics and formal logic, and he applied these disciplines to psychological theory in a way no one had done before. Hull’s
form of behaviorism was more sophisticated and complex than Watson’s. Hull liked to
tell his graduate students that “Watson is too naïve. His behaviorism is too simple and
crude” (quoted in Gengerelli, 1976, p. 686).
CLARK LEONARD
HULL

Hull’s Life
Throughout his life, Hull was plagued by ill health and poor eyesight. As a boy he nearly
died from typhoid, which left his memory impaired. When he was 24 he contracted polio;
as a result of the disease he had a permanent disability in one leg, forcing him to wear an
iron brace, which he designed himself. His family was poor, and Hull was forced to interrupt his education several times to take teaching jobs to earn money. His greatest asset was
an intense motivation to succeed, and he persevered in the face of many obstacles.
In 1918, at the relatively advanced age of 34, Hull received his Ph.D. from the University of Wisconsin, where he studied mining engineering before changing to psychology.
He remained on the Wisconsin faculty for 10 years. His early research interests foretold
his lifelong emphasis on objective methods and functional laws. Hull investigated concept formation, the effects of tobacco on behavioral efficiency, and tests and measurements, and he published a textbook on aptitude testing (Hull, 1928). He developed
methods of statistical analysis and invented a machine for calculating correlations, which
has been exhibited at the museums of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C.
He devoted 10 years to the study of hypnosis and suggestibility, publishing 32 papers
and a book summarizing the research (Hull, 1933).
In 1929 Hull accepted a position as research professor at Yale University to pursue his
interest in formulating a theory of behavior based on Pavlov’s laws of conditioning. He
had read Pavlov’s work a few years earlier and had become intrigued by problems of conditioned reflexes and learning. Hull referred to Pavlov’s Conditioned Reflexes as a “great
book” and decided to use animal subjects for his research. He had not run rats before because he detested the odors associated with a rat lab, but at Yale he visited the meticulously
clean rat colony maintained by E. R. Hilgard. Hull looked at the rats, “sniffed them and
said that he guessed he could use rats after all” (Hilgard, 1987, p. 201).
In the 1930s, Hull published articles about conditioning, arguing that complex
higher-order behaviors could be explained in terms of basic conditioning principles.

240

Chapter 11: Behaviorism: After the Founding

Hull’s Principles of Behavior (1943) outlined a comprehensive theoretical framework to
account for all behavior. Hull soon became the most frequently cited psychologist in
the field. In the 1940s, up to 40 percent of all experimental articles and 70 percent of
all articles on learning and motivation in the two leading American psychology journals
cited Hull’s work (Spence, 1952). Hull continually revised his system, incorporating the
results of his extensive research that put his propositions to experimental test. The final
form was published in 1952 in A Behavior System.

The Spirit of Mechanism
Hull described his behaviorism and his image of human nature in mechanistic terms and
regarded human behavior as automatic and capable of being reduced to the language of
physics. According to Hull, behaviorists should regard their subjects as machines, and he
subscribed to the view that machines would one day be constructed to think and display
other human cognitive functions. In 1926 Hull wrote, “It has struck me many times that
the human organism is one of the most extraordinary machines—and yet a machine.
And it has struck me more than once that so far as the thinking processes go, a machine
could be built which would do every essential thing that the body does” (quoted in
Amsel & Rashotte, 1984, pp. 2–3). We can see that the seventeenth-century spirit of
mechanism as represented by Europe’s mechanical figures, clocks, and automata (such
as the defecating duck) was faithfully incorporated into Hull’s work.

Objective Methodology and Quantification

Hypothetico-deductive
method: Hull’s method
for establishing postulates from which experimentally testable
conclusions can be
deduced.

Hull’s mechanistic, reductionistic, and objective behaviorism provides a clear view of
what his methods of study had to be. First, they would be objective. In addition, they
would be quantitative, with the fundamental laws of behavior expressed in the precise
language of mathematics.
Hull noted four methods he considered useful for scientific research. Three were already
widely used: simple observation, systematic controlled observation, and the experimental
testing of hypotheses. The fourth method Hull proposed was the hypothetico-deductive
method, which uses deduction from a set of formulations that are determined a priori.
This method involves establishing postulates from which experimentally testable conclusions can be deduced. These conclusions are submitted to experimental test, and they
must be revised if they are not supported by experimental evidence. If they are supported
and verified, then they may be incorporated into the body of science. Hull believed that
if psychology were to become truly objective like the other natural sciences—a basic principle of the behaviorist program—then the only appropriate method would be the
hypothetico-deductive one.

Drives
To Hull, the basis of motivation was a state of bodily need that arose from a deviation
from optimal biological conditions. Rather than introducing the concept of biological
need directly into his system, however, Hull postulated the intervening variable of “drive,”
a term that had already come into use in psychology. Drive was defined as a stimulus arising from a state of tissue need that arouses or activates behavior. In Hull’s view, reduction
or satisfaction of a drive is the sole basis for reinforcement. The strength of the drive can
be empirically determined by the length of deprivation, or by the intensity, strength, and
energy expenditure of the resulting behavior. Hull considered length of deprivation to be
an imperfect measure and placed greater emphasis on response strength.
Hull postulated two kinds of drive. Primary drives are associated with innate biological need states and are vital to the organism’s survival. Primary drives include food,

Clark Leonard Hull (1884–1952)

241

water, air, temperature regulation, defecation, urination, sleep, activity, sexual intercourse, and pain relief. Hull recognized, however, that organisms might be motivated
by forces other than primary drives. Accordingly, he proposed the learned or secondary
drives, which relate to situations or environmental stimuli associated with the reduction
of primary drives and so may become drives themselves. Thus, previously neutral stimuli
may acquire the characteristics of a drive because they are capable of eliciting responses
similar to the responses aroused by the primary drive or original need state.
A simple example involves touching a hot stove and getting burned. The painful burn,
caused by actual physical damage to the body’s tissues, produces a primary drive—the
desire for relief from the pain. Other environmental stimuli associated with this primary
drive, such as the sight of the stove, may in the future quickly lead to withdrawing the
hand when this visual stimulus is perceived. In this way, the sight of the stove becomes
the stimulus for the learned drive of fear. These secondary or learned drives that motivate our behavior develop from the primary drives.

Learning
Law of primary
reinforcement: When a
stimulus-response relationship is followed
by a reduction in a
bodily need, the probability increases that
on subsequent occasions the same stimulus will evoke the same
response.

Habit strength: The
strength of the
stimulus-response
connection, which is a
function of the number
of reinforcements.

Hull’s learning theory focuses on the principle of reinforcement, which is essentially
Thorndike’s law of effect. Hull’s law of primary reinforcement states that when a
stimulus-response relationship is followed by a reduction in need, the probability increases that on subsequent occasions the same stimulus will evoke the same response.
Reward or reinforcement is defined not in terms of Thorndike’s notion of satisfaction
but rather in terms of reducing a primary need. Thus, primary reinforcement (the reduction of a primary drive) is fundamental to Hull’s theory of learning.
Just as his system contains secondary or learned drives, it also deals with secondary
reinforcement. If the intensity of the stimulus is reduced because of a secondary drive,
then that drive will act as a secondary reinforcement.
It follows that any stimulus consistently associated with a reinforcement situation will
through that association acquire the power of evoking the conditioned inhibition, i.e.,
reduction in stimulus intensity, and so of itself producing the resulting reinforcement.
Since this indirect power of reinforcement is acquired through learning, it is called
secondary reinforcement. (Hull, 1951, pp. 27–28)
Stimulus-response connections are strengthened by the number of reinforcements
that have occurred. Hull called the strength of the S-R connection habit strength. It is
a function of reinforcement and refers to the persistence of the conditioning.
Learning cannot take place in the absence of reinforcement, which is necessary to
bring about a reduction of the drive. This emphasis on reinforcement characterizes
Hull’s system as a need-reduction theory, as opposed to Tolman’s cognitive theory.

Comment
As a leading exponent of neobehaviorism, Hull was the target of the same attacks aimed
at Watson and other behaviorists. Psychologists who opposed any behavioral approach
to psychology included Hull in the enemy camp.
His system can be faulted for its lack of generalizability. In his attempt to define variables precisely, in quantitative terms, Hull necessarily operated on a narrow plane. He
often formulated postulates from results obtained in a single experiment. Opponents argued that it is difficult to generalize to all behavior on the basis of specific experimental
demonstrations such as “the most favorable interval for human eyelid conditioning
(Postulate 2)” or “the weight in grams of food needed to condition a rat (Postulate 7)”
(quoted in Hilgard, 1956, p. 181). Although quantification is commendable, Hull’s
extreme approach reduced the range of applicability of his research findings.

242

Chapter 11: Behaviorism: After the Founding

Nevertheless, Hull’s influence on psychology was substantial. The sheer quantity of
research inspired by his work, as well as the large number of psychologists he influenced,
assures his stature in the history of psychology. Hull defended, extended, and expounded
the objective behaviorist approach to psychology as no one else had ever done. One historian wrote, “It is not often in any field that a true theoretical genius comes along; of
the very few to whom psychology can lay claim, Hull must surely rank among the foremost” (Lowry, 1982, p. 211).
Archives of the History of American Psychology/
University of Akron

B. F. Skinner (1904–1990)

B. F. SKINNER

For decades, B. F. Skinner was the world’s most influential psychologist. When Skinner
died in 1990, the editor of the journal American Psychologist praised him as “one of the
giants of our discipline” who “made a permanent mark on psychology” (Fowler, 1990,
p. 1203). Skinner’s obituary in the Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences described him as the “leading figure in behavior science of this century” (Keller, 1991, p. 3).
Beginning in the 1950s, Skinner was the major embodiment of American behavioral
psychology. He attracted a large, loyal, and enthusiastic band of followers. He developed
a program for the behavioral control of society, promoted behavior modification techniques, and invented an automated crib for tending infants. His novel, Walden Two, remained popular decades after its publication. His 1971 book Beyond Freedom and
Dignity was a national best-seller, giving Skinner the opportunity to advance his views
on television talk shows. He became a celebrity, his name as familiar to the general public as to other psychologists. In 1972, the magazine Psychology Today noted that, “For
perhaps the first time in American history, a professor of psychology has acquired the
celebrity of a movie or TV star” (quoted in Rutherford, 2000, p. 372).

Skinner’s Life
Skinner, born in Susquehanna, Pennsylvania, recalled his childhood environment as affectionate and stable. He attended the same small high school from which his parents
had graduated; there were only seven other students in Skinner’s graduating class. As a
child he was interested in building things: wagons, rafts, model airplanes, and a steam
cannon to shoot potato and carrot plugs over the roof. He spent years trying to develop
a perpetual motion machine. He read about animals and kept an assortment of turtles,
snakes, lizards, toads, and chipmunks. At a county fair he saw performing pigeons; years
later he would train pigeons to perform tricks.
Skinner’s system of psychology reflects his early life experiences. According to his
view, life is a product of past reinforcements. He claimed that his life was just as predetermined and orderly as his system dictated all human lives would be. He believed that
his experiences could be traced solely and directly to stimuli in his environment.
Skinner enrolled in Hamilton College in New York but was not happy there. He
wrote:
I never fitted into student life. I joined a fraternity without knowing what it was all
about. I was not good at sports and suffered acutely as my shins were cracked in ice
hockey or better players bounced basketballs off my cranium. … I complained that the
college was pushing me around with unnecessary requirements (one of them daily
chapel) and that almost no intellectual interest was shown by most of the students.
(Skinner, 1967, p. 392)
Skinner played practical jokes that disrupted the college community, and he openly
criticized the faculty and administration. He graduated with a degree in English, a Phi
Beta Kappa key, and a desire to become a writer. At a summer writing workshop, the

B. F. Skinner (1904–1990)

243

poet Robert Frost had commented favorably on Skinner’s poems and stories. For two
years after graduation he worked at writing, and then decided that he had nothing to
say. Depressed by his lack of success as a writer, he thought about consulting a psychiatrist. He considered himself a failure, and his self-worth was shattered. He was also disappointed in love; at least half a dozen women had rejected him.
He read about the conditioning experiments of Watson and Pavlov, which awakened
a scientific, rather than a literary, interest in human nature. In 1928, Skinner enrolled as
a graduate student in psychology at Harvard University, though he had never taken a
psychology course. He received his Ph.D. in three years, completed postdoctoral fellowships, and taught at the University of Minnesota (1936–1945) and Indiana University
(1945–1947), after which he returned to Harvard.
His dissertation topic provides a hint of the position to which he adhered throughout
his career. He proposed that a reflex is the correlation between a stimulus and a response, and nothing more. He noted the usefulness of the reflex concept in describing
behavior and gave ample credit to Descartes.
Skinner’s 1938 book, The Behavior of Organisms, describes the basic points of his system. The book sold just 80 copies in four years—a total of 500 copies in its first eight
years—and it received largely negative reviews. Fifty years later, it was judged “one of
the handful of books that changed the face of modern psychology” (Thompson, 1988,
p. 397). What turned this book from an initial failure to an overwhelming success was
its usefulness for applied areas such as educational and clinical psychology. Such widespread practical application of Skinner’s ideas was appropriate because he was keenly interested in solving real-world problems. A later work, Science and Human Behavior
(1953), became the basic textbook for Skinner’s behavioral psychology.
Skinner remained productive until his death at the age of 86. In the basement of his
home, he constructed his personal Skinner box, a controlled environment to provide
positive reinforcement. He slept in a yellow plastic tank large enough to contain a mattress, a few bookshelves, and a small television set. He went to bed each night at 10 PM,
slept for three hours, worked for an hour, slept three more hours, and arose at 5 AM in
the morning to work three more hours. Then he walked to his office for more work and
administered self-reinforcement every afternoon by listening to music.
He enjoyed writing and said that it provided considerable positive reinforcement. At
age 78, he wrote a paper titled “Intellectual Self-Management in Old Age,” citing his own
experiences as a case study (Skinner, 1983). He described how necessary it is for the
brain to work fewer hours each day, with rest periods between spurts of effort, to cope
with failing memory and diminished intellectual abilities. He was pleased to learn that he
had been cited in the psychological literature more frequently than Sigmund Freud.
When a friend asked if that had been a goal of his writing, he said simply, “I thought I
might make it” (quoted in Bjork, 1993, p. 214).
In 1989, Skinner was diagnosed with leukemia and given two months to live. In a
radio interview, he described his feelings:
I’m not religious, so I don’t worry about what will happen after I’m dead. And when I
was told that I had this and would be dead in a few months, I didn’t have any emotion
of any kind at all. Not a bit of panic, or fear, or anxiety. … The only thing that touched
me was, and really, my eyes watered when I thought of this, I will have to tell my wife
and my daughters. … I’ve had a very good life. It would be very foolish of me to complain, in any way, about it. So I’m enjoying these last few months as well as I ever
enjoyed life. (quoted in Catania, 1992, p. 1527)
Eight days before he died, though frail, Skinner presented a paper at the 1990 APA
convention in Boston. He vigorously attacked the growth of cognitive psychology, which

244

Chapter 11: Behaviorism: After the Founding

was challenging his form of behaviorism. The evening before his death, he was working
on his final article, “Can Psychology Be a Science of Mind?” (Skinner, 1990), which was
another indictment of the cognitive movement that threatened to supplant his view of
psychology.

Skinner’s Behaviorism
In several respects, Skinner’s position represented a renewal of Watson’s behaviorism.
One historian wrote, “Watson’s spirit is indestructible. Cleaned and purified, it breathes
through the writings of B. F. Skinner” (MacLeod, 1959, p. 34). Although Hull is also considered a rigorous behaviorist, there are differences between Hull’s and Skinner’s views.
Whereas Hull emphasized the importance of theory, Skinner advocated an empirical system with no theoretical framework within which to conduct research.
Skinner summarized his approach this way: “I never attacked a problem by constructing a hypothesis. I never deduced theorems or submitted them to experimental check. So
far as I can see I had no preconceived model of behavior—certainly not a physiological
or mentalistic one, and I believe not a conceptual one” (Skinner, 1956, p. 227). Nor did
Skinner draw on the work of other psychologists, with the exception of the ideas of
Watson and Pavlov. “I find it very difficult to incorporate anybody’s thinking in psychology in my own. I almost never read any psychology” (quoted in Overskeid, 2007, p. 591).
Skinner’s behaviorism was devoted to the study of responses. He was concerned with
describing rather than explaining behavior. His research dealt only with observable behavior, and he believed that the task of scientific inquiry is to establish functional relationships
between experimenter-controlled stimulus conditions and the organism’s subsequent
responses.
Skinner was not concerned with speculating about what might be occurring inside the
organism. His program included no presumptions about internal entities, whether intervening variables, drives, or physiological processes. Whatever might happen between
stimulus and response is not the sort of objective data the Skinnerian behaviorist dealt
with. Thus, Skinner’s purely descriptive behaviorism has been called, with good reason,
the “empty organism” approach. Human organisms are controlled and operated by
forces in the environment, the external world, and not by forces within themselves.
Note that Skinner did not question the existence of internal physiological or even mental
conditions. What he did deny was their usefulness for a scientific study of behavior. A
biographer reiterated that Skinner’s position was “not a denial of mental events, but a
refusal to resort to them as explanatory entities” (Richelle, 1993, p. 10).
In contrast to many of his contemporaries, Skinner did not consider it necessary to
use large numbers of subjects or to make statistical comparisons between the average responses of subject groups. His method was the comprehensive investigation of a single
subject.
A prediction of what the average individual will do is often of little or no value in dealing with a particular individual. … A science is helpful in dealing with the individual
only insofar as its laws refer to individuals. A science of behavior which concerns only
the behavior of groups is not likely to be of help in our understanding of the particular
case. (Skinner, 1953, p. 19)
In 1958, Skinnerian behaviorists established the Journal of the Experimental Analysis
of Behavior, largely in response to the unwritten requirements of mainstream psychology
journals concerning statistical analysis and the size of the subject sample. The Journal of
Applied Behavior Analysis was started as an outlet for behavior modification research, an
applied outgrowth of Skinner’s psychology.

B. F. Skinner (1904–1990)

245

In the following passage from Science and Human Behavior, Skinner described how
the work of Descartes and the mechanical figures of seventeenth-century Europe influenced his approach to psychology. Here we see a good example of the uses of history, a
twentieth-century psychologist building on work done 300 years before. This excerpt also
demonstrates the continuing evolution of machines; apparently they are becoming ever
more lifelike.

IN THEIR OWN WORDS
Original Source Material from Science and Human Behavior
(1953)
B. F. Skinner1
Behavior is a primary characteristic of living things. We almost identify it with life itself. Anything which moves is likely to be called alive—especially when the movement has direction or acts to alter the environment. Movement adds verisimilitude
to any model of an organism. The puppet comes to life when it moves, and idols
which move or breathe smoke are especially awe-inspiring. Robots and other mechanical creatures entertain us just because they move. And there is significance in
the etymology of the animated cartoon.
Machines seem alive simply because they are in motion. The fascination of the
steam shovel is legendary. Less familiar machines may actually be frightening. We
may feel that it is only primitive people who mistake them for living creatures today,
but at one time they were unfamiliar to everyone. When [the 19th-century poets
William] Wordsworth and [Samuel Taylor] Coleridge once passed a steam engine,
Wordsworth observed that it was scarcely possible to divest oneself of the impression
that it had life and volition. “Yes,” said Coleridge, “it is a giant with one idea.”
A mechanical toy which imitated human behavior led to the theory of what we now
call reflex action. In the first part of the seventeenth century certain moving figures
were commonly installed in private and public gardens as sources of amusement.
They were operated hydraulically. A young lady walking through a garden might step
upon a small concealed platform. This would open a valve, water would flow into a piston, and a threatening figure would swing out from the bushes to frighten her. René
Descartes knew how these figures worked, and he also knew how much they seemed
like living creatures. He considered the possibility that the hydraulic system which explained the one might also explain the other. A muscle swells when it moves a limb—
perhaps it is being inflated by a fluid coming along the nerves from the brain. The
nerves which stretch from the surface of the body into the brain may be the strings
which open the valves.
Descartes did not assert that the human organism always operates in this way.
He favored the explanation in the case of animals, but he reserved a sphere of action
for the “rational soul”—perhaps under religious pressure. It was not long before the
additional step was taken, however, which produced the full-fledged doctrine of
“man a machine.” The doctrine did not owe its popularity to its plausibility—there
was no reliable support for Descartes’s theory—but rather to its shocking metaphysical and theoretical implications.
Since that time two things have happened: machines have become more lifelike,
and living organisms have been found to be more like machines. Contemporary machines are not only more complex, they are deliberately designed to operate in ways
which resemble human behavior. “Almost human” contrivances are a common part
1

From Science and Human Behavior, by B. F. Skinner. © 1953, Free Press.

246

Chapter 11: Behaviorism: After the Founding

of our daily experience. Doors see us coming and open to receive us. Elevators remember our commands and stop at the correct floor. Mechanical hands lift imperfect
items off a conveyor belt. Others write messages of fair legibility. Mechanical or electric calculators solve equations too difficult or too time-consuming for human mathematicians. Man has, in short, created the machine in his own image. And as a result,
the living organism has lost some of its uniqueness. We are much less awed by machines than our ancestors were and less likely to endow the giant with even one
idea. At the same time, we have discovered more about how the living organism
works and are better able to see its machine-like properties.

Operant Conditioning
Operant conditioning:
A learning situation
that involves behavior
emitted by an organism
rather than elicited by
a detectable stimulus.

Law of acquisition: The
strength of an operant
behavior is increased
when it is followed by
the presentation of a
reinforcing stimulus.

Generations of psychology students have studied Skinner’s operant conditioning experiments and how they differ from the respondent behavior investigated by Pavlov. In the
Pavlovian conditioning situation, a known stimulus is paired with a response under conditions of reinforcement. The behavioral response is elicited by a specific observable
stimulus; Skinner called this behavioral response a respondent behavior.
Operant behavior occurs without any observable external antecedent stimulus, so that
the organism’s response appears to be spontaneous. This does not mean that there is no
stimulus that elicits the response but rather that no stimulus is detected when the response occurs. From the experimenters’ viewpoint, however, there is no stimulus because
they have not applied a stimulus and cannot see one.
Another difference between respondent and operant behavior is that operant behavior
operates on the organism’s environment; respondent behavior does not. The harnessed
dog in Pavlov’s laboratory can do nothing but respond (salivate, in this case) when the
experimenter presents the stimulus (the food). The dog cannot act on its own to secure
the stimulus. However, the operant behavior of the rat in the “Skinner box” is instrumental in securing the stimulus (the food). Skinner disliked the label “Skinner box,” a
term first used by Clark Hull in 1933. Skinner referred to his experimental equipment
as an “operant conditioning apparatus.” However, Skinner box has become popular and
accepted usage.
When the rat in the Skinner box presses the bar, it receives food, and it does not get
any food until it does press the bar, which thus operates on the environment. Skinner believed that operant behavior better represents the typical learning situation. Because behavior is mostly of the operant type, it follows that the most effective approach to a science of
behavior is to study the conditioning and extinguishing of these operant behaviors.
Skinner’s classic experimental demonstration involved bar pressing in a Skinner box
constructed to eliminate extraneous stimuli. A rat deprived of food was placed in the apparatus and allowed to explore. Eventually in the course of this exploration the rat would
accidentally depress a lever or bar that activated a mechanism releasing a food pellet
onto a tray. After receiving a few pellets (the reinforcers), conditioning was usually rapid.
Note that the rat’s behavior (pressing the lever) operated on the environment and thus
was instrumental in securing food. The dependent variable is simple and direct: it is the
rate of response.
From this basic experiment Skinner derived his law of acquisition, which states that
the strength of an operant behavior increases when it is followed by the presentation of a
reinforcing stimulus. Although practice is important in establishing a high rate of bar
pressing, the key variable is reinforcement. Practice by itself will not increase the rate of
responding; all it does is provide the opportunity for additional reinforcement to occur.
Skinner’s law of acquisition differs from Thorndike’s and Hull’s positions on learning.
Skinner did not deal with any pleasure/pain or satisfaction/dissatisfaction consequences

B. F. Skinner (1904–1990)

247

of reinforcement as did Thorndike. Nor did Skinner make any attempt to interpret reinforcement in terms of reducing drives as did Hull. Whereas the systems of Thorndike
and Hull are explanatory, Skinner’s is descriptive.

Schedules of Reinforcement
The initial research on bar pressing in the Skinner box demonstrated the role of reinforcement in operant behavior. The rat’s behavior was reinforced for every bar press. In
other words, the rat received food every time it made the correct response. In the real
world, however, reinforcement is not always so consistent or continuous, yet learning
occurs and behaviors persist even when reinforced intermittently. Skinner wrote:
We do not always find good ice or snow when we go skating or skiing. … We do not
always get a good meal in a particular restaurant because cooks are not always predictable. We do not always get an answer when we telephone a friend because the friend is
not always at home. … The reinforcements characteristic of industry and education are
almost always intermittent because it is not feasible to control behavior by reinforcing
every response. (Skinner, 1953, p. 99)

Reinforcement
schedules: Conditions
involving various rates
and times of
reinforcement.

Consider your own experience. Even if you study continuously, you may not get an A
on every test. On the job, even if you work at maximum efficiency, you do not receive
praise or pay raises every day. So Skinner wanted to know how behavior might be affected by variable reinforcement. Is one reinforcement schedule or pattern better than
another in determining an organism’s responses?
The impetus for the research came not from intellectual curiosity but expediency, and it
shows that science sometimes operates contrary to the idealized picture presented in many
textbooks. One Saturday afternoon, Skinner noticed that his supply of rat food pellets was
running low. At that time—the 1930s—food pellets could not simply be purchased from a
laboratory supply company. The experimenter (or graduate students) had to compound
them by hand, a laborious and time-consuming process. Rather than spend his weekend
making food pellets, Skinner asked himself what would happen if he reinforced his rats
only once a minute regardless of the number of responses they made. That way, he would
need far fewer food pellets for the weekend. He designed a series of experiments to test
different rates and times of reinforcement (Ferster & Skinner, 1957; Skinner, 1969).
In one set of studies, Skinner compared the response rates of animals reinforced for
every response with those reinforced after a specified time interval. The second condition
is the fixed interval reinforcement schedule. A reinforcer could be given once a minute
or once every four minutes. The important point is that the animal is reinforced only
after the passage of a fixed period of time. A job in which salary is paid once a week or
once a month provides reinforcement on a fixed interval schedule. Employees are paid
not for the number of items they produce (the number of responses) but for the number
of days or weeks that elapse. Skinner’s research showed that the shorter the time interval
between reinforcers, the more rapidly the animals responded. As the interval between
reinforcers lengthened, the response rate declined.
Frequency of reinforcement also affects the extinction of a response. Behaviors are
eliminated more quickly when they have been reinforced continuously and reinforcement is then stopped than when they have been reinforced intermittently. Some pigeons
responded up to 10,000 times without reinforcement when they had originally been conditioned on an intermittent reinforcement basis.
In the fixed ratio schedule, the reinforcer is presented not after a certain time interval
(as above) but after a predetermined number of responses. The animal’s behavior determines how often it will receive reinforcement. It may be required to respond 10 times or

248

Chapter 11: Behaviorism: After the Founding

20 times after receiving the initial reinforcer before it gets another one. Animals on a
fixed ratio schedule respond much faster than do those on a fixed interval schedule.
Rapid responding on fixed interval reinforcement will not bring additional reinforcement; the animal on a fixed interval schedule may press the bar five times or 50 times
and will still be reinforced only when the stated time interval has passed. The higher response rate on the fixed ratio schedule worked for rats, pigeons, and humans. In a fixed
ratio payment schedule in the workplace, an employee’s pay or commission depends on
the number of items produced or sold. This reinforcement schedule is effective as long as
the ratio is not too high, requiring an impossible amount of work for each unit of pay,
and the specific reinforcement offered is worth the effort.

Successive Approximation: The Shaping of Behavior

Successive
approximation: An explanation for the acquisition of complex
behavior. Behaviors
such as learning to
speak will be reinforced only as they
come to approximate
or approach the final
desired behavior.

In Skinner’s original operant-conditioning experiment, the operant behavior (pressing the
lever) is a simple behavior that a laboratory rat would be expected to display eventually in
the course of exploring its environment. Thus, the chance is high that such a behavior will
occur, assuming the experimenter has sufficient patience. It is obvious, however, that animals and humans demonstrate many more complex operant behaviors that have a much
lower probability of occurrence in the normal course of events. Remember the complicated
sequence of behaviors shown by Priscilla the Fastidious Pig, or the amazing feats of Bird
Brain, that were on display at the IQ Zoo. How are such complex behaviors learned? How
can a trainer or an experimenter or a parent reinforce and condition an animal or a child
to perform behaviors that are not likely to occur spontaneously?
Skinner answered these questions with the method of successive approximation, or
shaping (Skinner, 1953). He trained a pigeon in a very short time to peck at a specific
spot in its cage. The probability that the pigeon on its own would peck at that precise
spot was low. At first the pigeon was reinforced with food when it merely turned toward
the designated spot. Then reinforcement was withheld until the pigeon made some
movement, however slight, toward the spot. Next, reinforcement was given only for
movements that brought the pigeon closer to the spot. After that, the pigeon was reinforced only when it thrust its head toward the spot. Finally, the pigeon was reinforced
only when its beak touched the spot. Although this sounds time-consuming, Skinner
conditioned pigeons in less than three minutes.
The experimental procedure itself explains the term “successive approximation.” The
organism is reinforced as its behavior comes in successive or consecutive stages to approximate the final behavior desired. Skinner suggested that this is how children learn
the complex behavior of speaking. Infants spontaneously emit meaningless sounds,
which parents reinforce by smiling, laughing, and talking. After a while parents reinforce
this childish babbling in different ways, providing stronger reinforcers for sounds that
approximate words. As the process continues, parental reinforcement becomes more restricted, given only for appropriate usage and pronunciation. Thus, the complex behavior
of acquiring language skills is shaped by providing differential reinforcement in stages.

Aircribs, Teaching Machines, and Pigeon-Guided Missiles
The operant conditioning apparatus brought Skinner prominence among psychologists,
but it was the aircrib, a device to automate the care of infants, that brought him public
notoriety (Benjamin & Nielsen-Gammon, 1999). When Skinner and his wife decided to
have a second child, she said baby care through the first two years required too much
menial labor, so Skinner invented a mechanized environment to relieve parents of routine tasks. Although the aircrib was made available commercially, it was not a successful
product. Skinner’s daughter, reared in the aircrib, apparently bore no ill effects from the
experience.

B. F. Skinner (1904–1990)

249

Skinner first described the device in Ladies Home Journal magazine in 1945 and later
in his autobiography. It was
… a crib-sized living space that we began to call the “baby-tender.” It had sound-absorbing
walls and a large picture window. Air entered through filters at the bottom and, after
being warmed and moistened, moved upward through and around the edges of a tightly
stretched canvas, which served as a mattress. A strip of sheeting ten yards long passed over
the canvas, a clean section of which could be cranked into place in a few seconds. (Skinner,
1979, p. 275)
Another piece of equipment Skinner promoted was the teaching machine, invented in
the 1920s by Sidney Pressey. Unfortunately for Pressey, the device was ahead of its time
then, and there was insufficient interest to continue marketing it (Pressey, 1967). Contextual forces may have been responsible for the lack of interest then as well as for the
enthusiastic resurrection of the device some 30 years later (Benjamin, 1988). When
Pressey introduced the machine, he promised it would teach students at a faster pace
and require fewer classroom teachers. At the time, however, there was a surplus of teachers and no public pressure to improve the learning process. In the 1950s, when Skinner promoted a similar device, there was a shortage of teachers, an excess of students,
and public pressure to improve education so the United States could compete with the
Soviet Union in space exploration. Skinner summarized his work in this field in The
Technology of Teaching (1968). He said that he had not known about Pressey’s invention
when he developed his own teaching machine, but he gave due credit to his predecessor
once he learned of Pressey’s work. Teaching machines were widely used in the 1950s and
1960s, until they were superseded by computer-assisted instructional methods.
During World War II, Skinner, with the assistance of the Brelands, developed a guidance system to steer bombs dropped from warplanes to specific targets on the ground.
Pigeons housed in the nose-cones of the missiles were conditioned to peck at an image
of the target. Their responses affected the angles of the missiles’ fins so that they would
be targeted correctly. Skinner demonstrated that his pigeons could achieve a high degree
of accuracy. The U.S. military was apparently not impressed, however, when they opened
the nose cone and saw three pigeons instead of the sophisticated electronic equipment
they were expecting. They declined to add pigeons to their arsenal of weaponry (Skinner,
1960).
In the 1960s and 1970s, Keller and Marian Breland worked for the U.S. Department
of Defense. They
… conditioned herring gulls to conduct 360-degree searches over lakes and oceans,
taught pigeons to fly along a road to spot snipers, and conditioned ravens to perform
long-distance complex tasks such as taking pictures with small cameras held in their
beaks. It was notable that although they were able to escape from captivity, these animals consistently performed their tasks and returned. (Gillaspy & Bihm, 2002, p. 293)

Walden Two—A Behaviorist Society
Skinner mapped out a technology of behavior, an attempt to apply his laboratory findings to society as a whole. Whereas Watson spoke in general terms about constructing a
foundation for saner living through conditioning, Skinner described in detail the operation of such a society. His novel, Walden Two (1948), follows life in a 1,000-member
rural community in which behavior is controlled by positive reinforcement. The book
was the outgrowth of Skinner’s personal midlife crisis, a depression he suffered at age
41. He sought to resolve it by resuming his post-college identity as a writer, expressing
his conflicts and despair through the story’s main character, T. E. Frazier. Skinner wrote,

250

Chapter 11: Behaviorism: After the Founding

“Much of the life in Walden Two was my own at the time. I let Frazier say things I myself was not yet ready to say to anyone” (1979, pp. 297–298).
Three years passed before Skinner found a publisher for Walden Two. Many editors
rejected the manuscript, claiming it was wordy, slow, overly long, and badly organized
(Wiener, 1996). It was finally accepted when Skinner agreed to write an introductory
textbook on behavioral psychology for the same publisher. That work became his highly
popular Science and Human Behavior (1953). Walden Two went on to sell more than 3
million copies.
The society depicted in Skinner’s novel is based on his assumption that human nature
is machinelike. This idea reflects the line of thought we have traced from Galileo and
Newton through the British empiricists to Watson and Skinner. Skinner’s mechanistic,
analytic, and deterministic natural science approach, reinforced by the results of his conditioning experiments, persuaded many behavioral psychologists that with an awareness
of environmental conditions and the application of positive reinforcement, human
behavior could be guided, modified, and shaped.

Behavior Modification

Behavior modification:
The use of positive reinforcement to control
or modify the behavior
of individuals or
groups.

Skinner’s society that is based on positive reinforcement exists only in fictional terms,
but the control or modification of human behavior, individually and in small groups, is
widespread. Behavior modification through positive reinforcement is a frequently used
clinical application in mental hospitals, factories, prisons, and schools to change undesirable behaviors to more acceptable ones. Behavior modification works with people the
same way operant conditioning works to change the behavior of rats and pigeons; that
is, by reinforcing the desired behavior and not reinforcing undesired behavior.
Think of the child who throws temper tantrums to get food or attention. When parents give in to the child’s demands, they are reinforcing unpleasant behavior. In a behavior modification situation, behavior such as kicking and screaming would never be
reinforced. Only more socially acceptable behaviors would be reinforced. After a time
the child’s behavior will change because the tantrums no longer work to bring rewards,
whereas nicer behaviors will.
Operant conditioning and reinforcement have been applied in the workplace, where
behavior modification programs have been used to reduce absenteeism, improve job performance, promote safe work practices, and teach job skills. Behavior modification has
also been successful in altering the behavior of patients in mental hospitals. By rewarding
patients for appropriate behavior with tokens that can be exchanged for goods or privileges, and by not reinforcing negative or disruptive behaviors, positive behavioral
changes can be induced. Unlike traditional clinical techniques, the behavioral psychologist here is not concerned about whatever might be going on in the patient’s mind, any
more than the experimenter is concerned with any mental activities of the rat in the
Skinner box. The focus is exclusively on overt behavior and positive reinforcement.
Research has shown that behavior modification programs are usually successful only
within the organization or institution in which they are carried out. The effects rarely
transfer to outside situations because the program of reinforcement would have to be
continued, even intermittently, for the desired behavior changes to persist. For patients,
this can be done if caregivers in the home, for example, are trained to reinforce desirable
behaviors with smiles, praise, or other signs of affection and approval.
Punishment is not part of a behavior modification program. According to Skinner,
people should not be punished for failing to behave in desirable ways. Instead, they are
to be reinforced or rewarded when their behavior changes in positive ways. Skinner’s position that positive reinforcement is more effective than punishment in altering behavior
is supported by considerable human and animal research.

B. F. Skinner (1904–1990)

251

Skinner wrote that as a child he was never physically punished by his father and only
once by his mother, when she washed out his mouth with soap and water for saying a
naughty word (Skinner, 1976). He did not say whether the punishment was effective in
changing his behavior.

Criticisms of Skinner’s Behaviorism
Criticism of Skinner’s behaviorism has been directed toward his extreme positivism and
opposition to theory. Opponents argue that it is impossible to eliminate all theorizing.
Advance planning of the details of an experiment is evidence of theorizing, however simple. Also, Skinner’s acceptance of basic conditioning principles as the framework for his
research constitutes a degree of theorizing.
Skinner made confident assertions about economic, social, political, and religious issues that he derived from his system. In 1986, he wrote an article with the all-embracing
title “What Is Wrong with Life in the Western World?” He stated that “human behavior
in the West has grown weak, but it can be strengthened through the application of principles derived from an experimental analysis of behavior” (Skinner, 1986, p. 568). This
willingness to extrapolate from the data, particularly for proposals about solutions to
complex human problems, is inconsistent with an anti-theoretical stand and shows that
Skinner went beyond observable data in presenting his blueprint for the redesign of
society.
Skinner’s position that all behaviors are learned was challenged by the animal-training
work of his former students, Keller and Marian Breland. They found that pigs, chickens,
hamsters, porpoises, whales, cows, and other animals demonstrated a tendency toward
“instinctive drift.” This means that animals tended to substitute instinctive behaviors
for behaviors that had been reinforced, even when such instinctive behaviors interfered
with obtaining food.
Using food as a reinforcer, pigs and raccoons were quickly conditioned to pick up a
coin, carry it some distance, and drop it into a toy bank. After a while, however, the animals began performing unwanted behaviors.
Pigs would stop on their way, bury the coin in the sand, and take it out with their
snout; raccoons would spend a lot of time handling the coin, with their well-known
washing-like movements. This was at first amusing, but eventually it became
time-consuming and would make the whole show appear very imperfect to the spectator.
Commercially, it was a disaster. (Richelle, 1993, p. 68)
What was occurring was instinctive drift. The animals were reverting to innate behaviors that took precedence over learned behaviors, even though this caused a delay in
receiving food. Clearly in these cases, reinforcement was not as all-powerful as Skinner
claimed.
Skinner’s explanation of how infants learn to speak has been contested. Critics insist
that some behavior must be inherited. Infants do not learn language on a word-by-word
basis because they receive reinforcement for the correct usage or pronunciation of each
word. Instead, they master the grammatical rules necessary to produce sentences. The
potential to construct those rules, so this argument runs, is inherited, not learned
(Chomsky, 1959, 1972).

Contributions of Skinner’s Behaviorism
Despite these criticisms, Skinner remained the uncontested champion of behavioral psychology from the 1950s to the 1980s. During this period, American psychology was
shaped more by his work than by the ideas of any other psychologist. In 1958, the

252

Chapter 11: Behaviorism: After the Founding

APA bestowed on Skinner the Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award, noting that
“few American psychologists have had so profound an impact on the development of
psychology and on promising younger psychologists.”
In 1968, Skinner received the National Medal of Science, the highest accolade bestowed by the U.S. government for contributions to science. The American Psychological
Foundation presented Skinner with its Gold Medal Award, and he appeared on the cover
of Time magazine. In 1990, Skinner was awarded the APA’s Presidential Citation for
Lifetime Contribution to Psychology.
Skinner’s overall goal was the betterment of human lives and society through the application of the principles of his form of behaviorism (see Rutherford, 2009). Despite the
mechanistic nature of his system, he was a humanitarian, a quality apparent in his efforts
to modify behavior in the real-world settings of homes, schools, businesses, and institutions. He expected his technology of behavior to relieve human suffering and felt increasingly frustrated that his ideas, though popular and influential, had not been applied more
widely and wisely.
Although Skinner’s brand of behaviorism continues to be applied in laboratory, clinical, organizational, and other real-world settings, it has been challenged by the work of
the neo-neobehaviorists, including Albert Bandura and Julian Rotter, among others, who
take a more sociobehavioral approach.

Sociobehaviorism: The Cognitive Challenge

Archives of the History of American
Psychology/University of Akron

Bandura and Rotter and the followers of their sociobehavioral approach are primarily
behaviorists themselves, but their form of behaviorism is quite unlike Skinner’s. They
question his total disavowal of mental or cognitive processes and propose instead a social
learning or sociobehavioral approach, a reflection of the broader cognitive movement
in psychology as a whole. Social learning theories mark the third stage (the
neo-neobehaviorism stage) in the development of the behaviorist school of thought. We
discuss the origins and impact of the cognitive movement as a whole in Chapter 15.

Albert Bandura (1925– )

ALBERT BANDURA

Albert Bandura was born in Canada, in a town so small that his high school had only
20 students and two teachers. His parents were immigrants from Eastern Europe who
had little formal education, but who placed a high value on it for their son. After Albert
graduated from high school, he worked with construction crews in the Yukon Territory,
filling potholes in the Alaska Highway. “Finding himself in the midst of a curious collection of characters, most of whom had fled creditors, alimony, and probation officers, [Bandura] quickly developed a keen appreciation for the psychopathology of everyday life,
which seemed to blossom in the austere tundra” (Distinguished Scientific Contribution
Award, 1981, p. 28).
Bandura enrolled at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver where, quite by
accident, he discovered what he wanted to do with his life. “I was in a carpool with premeds and engineers who enrolled in classes at an unmercifully early hour. So while waiting for my English class, I flipped through a course catalogue that happened to have
been left on a table in the library. I noticed an introductory psychology course that
would be an early time filler. I enrolled in it and found my future profession” (Bandura,
2007, p. 46).
Thus he took his first course in psychology only because it was offered at a convenient time. He earned a Ph.D. from the University of Iowa in 1952 and went from there
to a distinguished and highly productive career at Stanford University.

Albert Bandura (1925– )

253

Social Cognitive Theory

Vicarious
reinforcement: Bandura’s notion that
learning can occur by
observing the behavior
of other people, and
the consequences of
their behavior, rather
than by always
experiencing reinforcement personally.

Bandura’s social cognitive theory is a less extreme form of behaviorism than Skinner’s,
and it reflects the spirit of its times and the impact of psychology’s renewed interest in
cognitive factors. Bandura’s viewpoint remained behaviorist, however. His research focus
was to observe the behavior of human subjects in interaction. He did not use introspection, and he emphasized the importance of rewards or reinforcements in acquiring and
modifying behavior.
In addition to being a behavioral theory, Bandura’s system is cognitive. He stressed
the influence on external reinforcement schedules of such thought processes as beliefs,
expectations, and instructions. In Bandura’s view, behavioral responses are not automatically triggered in humans by external stimuli, as with a machine or a robot. Instead, reactions to stimuli are self-activated, initiated by the person. When an external reinforcer
alters behavior, it does so because the person is consciously aware of the response that is
being reinforced and anticipates receiving the same reinforcer for behaving in the same
way the next time the situation arises.
Although Bandura agreed with Skinner that human behavior can be changed through
reinforcement, he also suggested, and demonstrated empirically, that individuals can
learn virtually all kinds of behavior without experiencing reinforcement directly. We do
not always have to be reinforced ourselves in order to learn something. We can also
learn through what Bandura called vicarious reinforcement, by observing how other
people behave and seeing the consequences of their behavior.
This ability to learn by example and vicarious reinforcement assumes that we have the
capacity to anticipate and appreciate consequences we observe in others, even though we
have not experienced them ourselves. We can regulate our behavior by visualizing the
consequences of a particular behavior we have not personally experienced and then making a conscious decision to behave or not behave similarly. Bandura suggests that there is
not a direct link between stimulus and response, or between behavior and reinforcement,
as Skinner noted. Instead, a mediating mechanism is interposed between stimulus and
response, and that mechanism is the person’s cognitive processes.
Thus, cognitive processes came to play a powerful role in Bandura’s social cognitive
theory, and this distinguished his views from Skinner’s. To Bandura, it is not the actual
reinforcement schedule that is effective in changing a person’s behavior but rather what
the person thinks that schedule is. Rather than learning by experiencing reinforcement
directly, we learn through “modeling,” which involves observing other people and patterning our behavior on theirs. For Skinner, whoever controls the reinforcers controls
behavior. For Bandura, whoever controls society’s models controls behavior.
Bandura has conducted extensive research on the characteristics of the models that
influence human behavior. We are much more likely to model our behavior after a person of the same sex and age, our peers, who have solved problems similar to our own.
We also tend to be impressed by models high in status and prestige. The type of behavior involved affects the extent of our imitation. Simple behaviors are more likely to be
imitated than highly complex behaviors. Hostile and aggressive behaviors tend to be
strongly imitated, especially by children (Bandura, 1986). Thus, what we see in real life
or in the media can often determine our behavior.
For example, research conducted in several countries has consistently found that children who watch a great deal of violence on television and in movies, or who spend time
playing action-packed videogames, display far more violent and aggressive behavior as
adolescents and young adults than do children who are exposed to less violence (Anderson et al., 2010; Rogoff, Paradise, Correa-Chavez, & Angelillo, 2003; Uhlmann & Swanson, 2004). Research has also shown that teenagers and young adults who listen

254

Chapter 11: Behaviorism: After the Founding

frequently to rap music tend to become more hostile and sexually aggressive than those
who listen to less of this type of music (Chen, Miller, Grube, & Walters, 2006).
Bandura’s approach is a social learning theory because it studies behavior as formed
and modified in social situations. Bandura criticized Skinner for using only individual subjects (mostly rats and pigeons) instead of human subjects interacting with one another.
Few people live in social isolation. Bandura charged that psychologists cannot expect
research findings that ignore social interactions to be relevant to the modern world.

Self-Efficacy
Self-efficacy: One’s
sense of self-esteem
and competence in
dealing with life’s
problems.

Bandura conducted considerable research on self-efficacy, described as our sense of
self-esteem or self-worth and our feeling of adequacy, efficiency, and competence in
dealing with problems (Bandura, 1982). His work has shown that people who have a
great deal of self-efficacy believe they are capable of coping with the diverse events in
their lives. They expect to be able to overcome obstacles. They seek challenges, persevere, and maintain a high level of confidence in their ability to succeed and to exert
control over their lives. One researcher described self-efficacy simply as the “power of
believing you can,” adding that “believing that you can accomplish what you want to
accomplish is one of the most important ingredients in the recipe for success”
(Maddux, 2002, p. 277).
People low in self-efficacy feel helpless, even hopeless, about coping and think they
have little chance to affect the situations they confront. When they encounter problems, they are likely to give up if their initial attempts at solutions fail. They believe
nothing they can do will make a difference and that they have little or no control over
their fate.
Bandura’s research has shown that our belief in our level of self-efficacy influences
many aspects of our lives. For example, people higher in self-efficacy tend to earn better
grades, consider more career possibilities, have greater job success, set higher personal
goals, and enjoy better physical and mental health than people lower in self-efficacy. In
general, men have been found to be higher than women in self-efficacy. For both men
and women, self-efficacy seems to peak in middle age and decline after age 60.
It seems obvious that a high degree of self-efficacy will lead to positive effects in many
aspects of life. Research has shown that people high in self-efficacy feel better and healthier, and are less bothered by stress, more tolerant of physical pain, and likely to recover
more quickly from illness or surgery than people low in self-efficacy. Self-efficacy also
affects classroom and job performance. For example, employees high in self-efficacy
have been found to be more satisfied with their work, committed to their organization,
and motivated to perform well on the job and in training programs than are employees
low in self-efficacy (Salas & Cannon-Bowers, 2001). Also, people high in social
self-efficacy feel confident about their ability to initiate social contact and develop new
friendships. They score high on measures of emotional well-being and are less likely to
become addicted to Internet use than are those who score low in social self-efficacy
(Herman & Betz, 2006; Iskender & Akin, 2010).
Bandura’s research showed that groups develop collective efficacy levels that influence their performance of various tasks. Research on such diverse units as sports teams,
corporate departments, military outfits, urban neighborhoods, and political action
groups found that “the stronger the perceived collective efficacy, the higher the group’s
aspirations and motivational investment in their undertakings, the stronger their
staying power in the face of impediments and setbacks, the higher their morale and resilience to stressors, and the greater their performance accomplishments” (Bandura,
2001, p. 14).

Albert Bandura (1925– )

255

Behavior Modification
Bandura’s purpose in developing a social cognitive approach to behaviorism was to
change or modify those behaviors society considers abnormal or undesirable. He reasoned that if all behaviors are learned by observing other people and modeling our behavior on theirs, then undesirable behaviors can be altered or relearned in the same way.
Like Skinner, Bandura focused on externals, on the behavior itself and not on any presumed internal conscious or unconscious conflict. To Bandura, treating the symptom
means treating the disorder, because symptom and disorder are the same.
Modeling techniques are used to change behavior by having subjects observe a model
in a situation that usually causes them some anxiety. For example, children who are
afraid of dogs watch a child their age approach and touch a dog. Observing from a safe
distance, the fearful children see the model make progressively closer and bolder movements toward the dog. The model pets the dog through the bars of a playpen, then enters the pen to play with the dog. As a result of this observational learning situation, the
children’s fear of dogs can be reduced. In a variation of this technique, subjects watch
models play with the feared object, such as a snake, and then the subjects themselves
make progressively closer movements toward the object until they are actually able to
handle it.
Bandura’s form of behavior therapy is widely used in clinical, business, and classroom
situations and has been supported by hundreds of experimental studies. It has been effective in eliminating phobias about snakes, closed spaces, open spaces, and heights. It is
also useful in treating obsessive-compulsive disorders, sexual dysfunctions, and some
forms of anxiety, and it can be used to enhance self-efficacy.
Bandura’s work has been adapted for radio and television programs designed to present models for appropriate behavior in addressing social and national problems such as
preventing unwanted pregnancies, controlling the spread of AIDS, promoting literacy,
raising the status of women, and adopting family-planning strategies. These programs
rely on fictional characters who act as models for listeners and viewers to emulate in
changing their behavior. Research conducted on these radio and television dramas reports significant increases in desirable behaviors such as safe-sex practices, family planning, and enhancing the status of women (Bandura, 2007, 2009; Smith, 2002a).

Comment
As you would expect, traditional behaviorists criticized Bandura’s social cognitive behaviorism, arguing that cognitive processes such as belief and anticipation have no causal
effect on behavior. Bandura responded by saying that “it is amusing to see radical behaviorists, who contend that thoughts have no causal influence, devoting considerable time
to speeches, articles, and books in an effort to convert people’s beliefs to their way of
thinking” (quoted in Evans, 1989, p. 83).
Social cognitive theory has been widely accepted in psychology as an effective way to
study behavior in the laboratory and to modify it in clinical settings. In addition, Bandura’s contributions have been widely recognized by his peers. He was president of the
APA in 1974, and in 1980 he received the APA’s Distinguished Scientific Contribution
Award. In 2004 he received the APA’s Outstanding Contribution to Psychology Award,
and in 2006 he was the recipient of the American Psychological Foundation’s Gold
Medal Award for Life Achievement in the Science of Psychology.
Bandura’s theory and the modeling therapy derived from it fit the functional, practical
cast of American psychology. His approach is objective and amenable to precise laboratory methods. It is responsive to the current intellectual climate that focuses on internal
cognitive variables and is applicable to real-world issues.

256

Chapter 11: Behaviorism: After the Founding

Julian Rotter (1916– )
Julian Rotter grew up in Brooklyn, New York. The family lived comfortably until his father lost his business at the beginning of the Great Depression in 1929. This unfortunate
change in economic circumstances was a turning point for the 13-year-old Rotter. He
wrote, “It began in me a lifelong concern with social injustice and provided me with a
powerful lesson on how personality and behavior were affected by situational conditions”
(Rotter, 1993, p. 274).
During high school he discovered books on psychoanalysis by Sigmund Freud and
Alfred Adler. As a game he started interpreting the dreams of his friends and decided
he wanted to become a psychologist. Disappointed to learn that there were few jobs for
psychologists, Rotter chose to major in chemistry at Brooklyn College. Once there, however, he happened to meet Adler and switched to psychology after all, even though he
knew it was impractical. He hoped to pursue an academic career, but prejudice against
Jews thwarted that goal. “At Brooklyn College and again in graduate school I had been
warned that Jews simply could not get academic jobs, regardless of their credentials. The
warnings seemed justified” (Rotter, 1982, p. 346).
After Rotter received his Ph.D. from Indiana University in 1941, he accepted a job at
a state mental hospital in Connecticut. He served as a psychologist with the U.S. Army
during World War II, taught at Ohio State University until 1963, and moved to the University of Connecticut. In 1988, he received the APA’s Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award.

Cognitive Processes
Rotter was the first psychologist to use the term “social learning theory” (Rotter, 1947).
He developed a cognitive form of behaviorism, which, like Bandura’s, includes reference
to internal subjective experiences. Thus his behaviorism, like Bandura’s, is less radical
than Skinner’s.
Rotter criticized Skinner for studying individual subjects in isolation, arguing that we
learn behavior primarily through social experiences. Rotter’s laboratory research was rigorous and well controlled, typical of the behaviorist movement. He studied only human
subjects in social interaction.
Rotter emphasized cognitive processes to a greater extent than Bandura. Rotter believed that we perceive ourselves as conscious beings capable of influencing the experiences that affect our lives. Our behavior is determined by external stimuli and by the
reinforcement they provide, but the relative influence of these two factors is mediated
by our cognitive processes. Rotter delineated the following four principles that govern
behavioral outcomes (Rotter, 1982):
•
•
•
•

We form subjective expectations of the outcomes or results of our behavior in terms of
the amount and kind of reinforcement likely to follow it.
We estimate the likelihood that behaving in a certain way leads to a specific reinforcement and adjust our behavior accordingly.
We place different values on different reinforcers and assess their relative worth for
different situations.
Because each of us functions in a psychological environment that is unique to us as
individuals, the same reinforcement can have different values for different people.

Thus, to Rotter, our subjective expectations and values, which are internal cognitive
states, determine the effects that different external experiences (different external stimuli
and reinforcers) will have on us.

Julian Rotter (1916– )

257

Locus of Control

Locus of control: Rotter’s idea about the
perceived source of
reinforcement. Internal
locus of control is the
belief that reinforcement depends on one’s
own behavior; external
locus of control is the
belief that reinforcement depends on outside forces.

Rotter focused considerable research on our beliefs about the source of our reinforcers.
Some people believe reinforcement depends on their own behavior; these people are said
to have an internal locus of control. Other people believe reinforcement depends on
outside forces such as fate, luck, or the actions of other people; they are said to have an
external locus of control (Rotter, 1966).
Obviously, these perceptions about the source of control exert different influences on
behavior. To people with an external locus of control, their own abilities and actions
make little difference in the reinforcers they receive. Convinced they are powerless with
respect to outside forces, they make minimal attempts to change or improve their situation. But people with an internal locus of control expect to be in charge of their lives and
behave accordingly.
Rotter’s research has shown that people with an internal locus of control tend to be
physically and mentally healthier than those with an external locus of control. In general,
internals have lower blood pressure, fewer heart attacks, less anxiety and depression, and
are better able to cope with stress. They receive better grades in school and believe they
have greater freedom of choice. They are more popular and socially skilled and rank
higher in self-esteem. In addition, Rotter’s work suggests that locus of control is learned
in childhood from the behavior of parents or caregivers. Parents of adults who have an
internal locus of control tend to be supportive, generous with praise for achievement (positive reinforcement), consistent in their discipline, and not authoritarian in their attitudes.
Rotter developed a test to measure locus of control. The test consists of 23
forced-choice alternatives; subjects select the one in each pair that best describes their
beliefs (see Table 11.1).
T A B LE 1 1. 1 S A M PL E I T EM S F R OM TH E I - E SC A L E

1. Many of the unhappy things in people’s lives are partly due to bad luck.

People’s misfortunes result from the mistakes they make.
2. One of the major reasons why we have wars is because people don’t take enough

3.

4.

5.

6.

interest in politics.
There will always be wars, no matter how hard people try to prevent them.
In the long run, people get the respect they deserve in this world.
Unfortunately, an individual’s worth often passes unrecognized no matter how
hard he or she tries.
The idea that teachers are unfair to students is nonsense.
Most students don’t realize the extent to which their grades are influenced by
accidental happenings.
Without the right breaks, one cannot be an effective leader.
Capable people who fail to become leaders have not taken advantage of their
opportunities.
No matter how hard you try, some people just don’t like you.
People who can’t get others to like them don’t understand how to get along with
others.

Note: From “Generalized Expectancies for Internal Versus External Control of Reinforcement,” by J. B. Rotter, 1966, Psychological Monographs, 80, p. 11.

A chance discovery We saw that Skinner’s accidental discovery of reinforcement
schedules was the result of expedience, of not wanting to spend the weekend in the laboratory making food pellets for his rats. We noted that science does not always advance

258

Chapter 11: Behaviorism: After the Founding

in the rational, systematic fashion described in many textbooks. Random or accidental
factors intrude to shape the development of a field of study. For Rotter’s concept of locus
of control, which he considered his most significant discovery, the impetus was a chance
remark made by a colleague.
Rotter was conducting an experiment in which subjects working with sets of cards
were instructed to guess whether the reverse side of the cards showed a square or a circle. They were told that they were being rated on their powers of extrasensory perception
(ESP). After they had finished with one set of cards, they were asked to estimate how
successful they believed they would be with the second set of cards.
Some subjects reported they would do worse because they thought that their successful guesses on the first trial were simply a matter of luck. Other subjects said they would
do better because they believed that their successful guesses the first time were based on
their ESP skills, which they expected would improve with practice.
At the time Rotter was conducting this research, he was also supervising the clinical
training of E. Jerry Phares. Phares spoke to Rotter about a patient who was upset about
his lack of social life. At Phares’s urging the man went to a party and danced with several women, but even with that apparent social success his outlook did not change. He
told Phares that he had just been lucky: “It would never happen again.”
When Rotter heard the story, he realized that
… there were always some subjects in our experiments whose expectancies, like this
patient’s, never went up even after successes. My graduate students and I had run
various experiments in which we rigged the volunteers’ success or failure.… Some
volunteers, whether we told them they were right or wrong most of the time, didn’t
change their expectations that they’d get most of them wrong on the next set. Others,
whatever we told them, thought they’d do better the next time.
At that point I put together the two sides of my work—as practitioner and as
scientist—and hypothesized that some people feel that what happens to them is governed by external forces of one kind or another, while others feel that what happens
to them is governed largely by their own efforts and skills. (Rotter, quoted in Hunt,
1993, p. 334)
We are left to wonder whether Rotter would have developed the idea of locus of control had Phares’s patient revised his outlook about his own popularity after going to the
dance.

Comment
Rotter’s social learning theory has attracted many followers who are primarily experimentally oriented and who agree on the importance of cognitive variables in influencing
behavior. His research is as rigorous and controlled as the subject matter allows, and he
defined his concepts with the precision that makes them amenable to experimental testing. A large number of research studies, particularly on internal-external locus of control,
support his approach. Rotter claimed that locus of control was “one of the most studied
variables in psychology and the other social sciences” (Rotter, 1990, p. 489).

The Fate of Behaviorism
Although the cognitive challenge to behaviorism from within succeeded in modifying the
behaviorist movement we have followed from Watson through Skinner, it is important
to remember that Bandura, Rotter, and the other neo-neobehaviorists who support the

Discussion Questions

259

cognitive approach still consider themselves behaviorists. We may call them methodological behaviorists because they invoke internal cognitive processes as part of psychology’s
subject matter, whereas radical behaviorists believe psychology must study only overt behavior and environmental stimuli, not any presumed internal states. Watson and Skinner
were radical behaviorists. Hull, Tolman, Bandura, and Rotter can be classified as methodological behaviorists.
The dominance of Skinner’s brand of behaviorism peaked in the 1980s and declined
after Skinner’s death in 1990. Even the famous Harvard pigeon laboratory, begun by
Skinner in 1948, was closed in 1998 (Azar, 2002). Skinner conceded before his death
that his form of behaviorism was losing ground and that the impact of the cognitive
approach was growing. Other scholars agree, noting that “fewer scholars at major universities now call themselves behaviorists in the traditional sense. In fact, ‘behaviorism’ is
often referred to in the past tense” (Baars, 1986, p. 1).
The behaviorism that remains vital in contemporary psychology, especially within applied psychology, is a different behaviorism from that which flourished in the decades
between Watson’s 1913 manifesto and Skinner’s death. As with all evolutionary movements in science and in nature, species will continue to evolve. In that sense, behaviorism survives in the spirit of its founder’s intent, which was to develop a technology that
could be used to change behavior for the better.

Discussion Questions
What does Priscilla the Fastidious Pig have to do
with the history of psychology? By what techniques was this animal trained?
2. Describe the three stages in the evolution of the
behaviorist school of thought.
3. Which psychologists can be classified as
neobehaviorists? On what major points did they
agree?
4. What was operationism and how did it influence
the neobehaviorists of the 1920s and 1930s?
5. What are pseudo-problems? Why was the
notion of pseudo-problems so appealing to
behaviorists?
6. Give an example of an intervening variable.
Describe how it can be defined operationally.
7. What did Tolman mean by purposive
behaviorism?
8. How did Hull’s behaviorism differ from the views
of Watson and Tolman?
9. What role did the spirit of mechanism play in
Hull’s approach to behaviorism?
10. Define Hull’s concepts of primary and secondary
drives and primary and secondary reinforcement.
11. What is the hypothetico-deductive method? List
some criticisms of Hull’s system.
1.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

Describe Skinner’s views on theorizing, the
mechanistic spirit, intervening variables, and the
use of statistics.
Distinguish between operant and respondent
conditioning. How is operant conditioning used
to modify behavior?
What is Skinner’s law of acquisition? How did it
differ from Thorndike’s and Hull’s positions on
learning?
What is the difference between fixed-interval and
fixed-ratio reinforcement schedules? Give a few
examples of each.
How would you apply the method of successive
approximation to train a dog to walk in a circle?
On what grounds has Skinner’s system been
criticized?
How do Bandura’s and Rotter’s views on cognitive factors differ from Skinner’s views?
How is modeling used to change behavior? Give
an example.
How do people high in self-efficacy differ from
people low in self-efficacy?
Distinguish between self-efficacy and locus of
control in terms of their effects on behavior.

260

Chapter 11: Behaviorism: After the Founding

Recommended Resources
Bandura, A. (1976). Albert Bandura. In R. I. Evans
(Ed.), The making of psychology: Discussions with
creative contributors. New York: Knopf.
Interviews with Bandura about his life and work.
Freeman, J. (2010). The tyranny of e-mail. New York:
Scribner.
Proposes that the “variable reinforcement schedule”
of receiving messages in our e-mail in-box has the
effect of conditioning our behavior.
Kuhlmann, H. (2005). Living Walden Two: B. F. Skinner’s
behaviorist utopia and experimental communities.
Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Describes the founding and functioning of several
communities established on the basis of Skinner’s
principles of behaviorism and reinforcement.
Pressey, S. L. (1967). Autobiography. In E. G. Boring &
G. Lindzey (Eds.), A history of psychology in autobiography (Vol. 5, pp. 313–339). New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts.
Sidney Pressey’s account of his work, including his
development of the teaching machine.
Rutherford, A. (2009). Beyond the box: Skinner’s technology of behavior from laboratory to life. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.
Traces developments in behavior analysis since
Skinner’s work and shows the evolution of his ideas
from laboratory experiments to a variety of applied
situations.
Skinner, B. F. (1953). Science and human behavior.
New York: Free Press.
Skinner’s approach to the scientific analysis of human behavior.

Smith, L. D., & Woodward, W. R. (Eds.). (1996). B. F.
Skinner and behaviorism in American culture.
Bethlehem, PA: Lehigh University Press.
Offers analyses of Skinner’s social philosophy and
technological viewpoint and assesses his impact on
American society. Includes biographical and autobiographical material.
Tolman, E. C. (1922). A new formula for behaviorism.
Psychological Review, 29, 44–53.
Discusses the idea that a less physiologically based
conception of behaviorism would allow psychologists to deal more comprehensively with the topics
of motivation and emotion.
Tolman, E. C. (1952). Autobiography. In E. G. Boring,
H. S. Langfeld, H. Werner, & R. M. Yerkes (Eds.), A
history of psychology in autobiography (Vol. 4, pp.
323–339). Worcester, MA: Clark University Press.
Tolman’s account of his career in psychology.
Walter, M. (1990). Science and cultural crisis: An intellectual biography of Percy Williams Bridgman
(1882–1961). Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
Presents Bridgman’s life and work and describes
how he reluctantly became a major figure in the
philosophy of science with his doctrine of
operationism.
Wiener, D. N. (1996). B. F. Skinner: Benign anarchist.
Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
A psychological and intellectual portrait of Skinner
based on extensive interviews with the subject, colleagues, and students.
