SCIENCE AND HUMAN
BEHAVIOR
BY

B. F. SKINNER

Copyright © 2014, The B. F. Skinner Foundation.
This book was previously published by Pearson Education, Inc.
Printing of individual chapters allowed FOR PERSONAL USE ONLY.
Transfer of the files to any other person violates the copyright.

This book is for sale at the B. F. Skinner Foundation website:
http://bfskinner.org/store/
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 53-7045

To
F. S. K E L L E R

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The quotation from Francesco Lana (Chapter I) was brought to
the attention of the readers of Science, August 25, 1939, by M. F.
Ashley-Montagu. Permission to quote from George Bernard Shaw's
The Adventures of the Black Girl in Her Search for God (Chapter
IV) was kindly granted by the Society of Authors. The story about
Dean Briggs (Chapter XIV) was reported by Mary E. Woolley in
the American Scholar, Volume 1, Number 1, 1932. The quotation
from Carl R. Rogers (Chapter XXIX) is to be found on page 212 of
the Harvard Educational Review, Fall, 1948, and is used with
permission. I am indebted to J. G. Beebe-Center for a helpful reading
of the manuscript. I am also grateful for editorial assistance from Mrs.
Diana S. Larsen and Miss Dorothy Cohen.
Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts

B.F.S.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION I: THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF
HUMAN
BEHAVIOR
I. CAN SCIENCE HELP?
II. A SCIENCE OF BEHAVIOR
III. WHY ORGANISMS
BEHAVE
23

3
11

SECTION II: THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR
IV. REFLEXES AND CONDITIONED REFLEXES
V. OPERANT BEHAVIOR
VI. SHAPING AND MAINTAINING
OPERANT BEHAVIOR
VII. OPERANT DISCRIMINATION
VIII. THE CONTROLLING ENVIRONMENT
IX. DEPRIVATION AND SATIATION
X. EMOTION
XI. AVERSION, AVOIDANCE, ANXIETY
XII. PUNISHMENT
XIII. FUNCTION VERSUS ASPECT
XIV. THE ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX CASES

45
59
91
107
129
141
160
171
182
194
204

SECTION III: THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

XV. "SELF-CONTROL"
XVI. THINKING
XVII. PRIVATE EVENTS IN
A NATURAL SCIENCE
XVIII. THE SELF

227
242
257
283
ix

X

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SECTION IV: THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS
XIX. SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
XX. PERSONAL CONTROL
XXI. GROUP CONTROL

297
313
323

SECTION V: CONTROLLING AGENCIES
XXII.
XXIII.
XXIV.
XXV.
XXVI.

GOVERNMENT AND LAW
RELIGION
PSYCHOTHERAPY
ECONOMIC CONTROL
EDUCATION

333
350
359
384
402

SECTION VI-. THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
XXVII. CULTURE AND CONTROL
XXVIII. DESIGNING A CULTURE
XXIX. THE PROBLEM OF CONTROL

415
426
437

INDEX

451

SECTION

I

THE POSSIBILITY OF

A SCIENCE OF
HUMAN BEHAVIOR

CHAPTER

I

CAN SCIENCE HELP?

THE MISUSE OF SCIENCE
By the middle of the seventeenth century it had come to be
understood that the world was enclosed in a sea of air, much as the
greater part of it was covered by water. A scientist of the period,
Francesco Lana, contended that a lighter-than-air ship could float
upon this sea, and he suggested how such a ship might be built. He
was unable to put his invention to a practical test, but he saw only
one reason why it might not work:
. . . that God will never suffer this Invention to take effect, because
of the many consequencies which may disturb the Civil
Government of men. For who sees not, that no City can be secure
against attack, since our Ship may at any time be placed directly
over it, and descending down may discharge Souldiers; the same
would happen to private Houses, and Ships on the Sea: for our Ship
descending out of the Air to the sails of Sea-Ships, it may cut their
Ropes, yea without descending by casting Grapples it may over-set
them, kill their men, burn their Ships by artificial Fire works and
Fire-balls. And this they may do not only to Ships but to great
Buildings, Castles, Cities, with such security that they which cast
these things down from a height out of Gun-shot, cannot on the
other side be offended by those below.
3

4 THE

POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

Lana's reservation was groundless. He had predicted modern air
warfare in surprisingly accurate detail—with its paratroopers and its
strafing and bombing. Contrary to his expectation, God has suffered
his invention to take effect.
And so has Man. The story emphasizes the irresponsibility with
which science and the products of science have been used. Man's
power appears to have increased out of all proportion to his wisdom.
He has never been in a better position to build a healthy, happy, and
productive world; yet things have perhaps never seemed so black.
Two exhausting world wars in a single half century have given no
assurance of a lasting peace. Dreams of progress toward a higher
civilization have been shattered by the spectacle of the murder of
millions of innocent people. The worst may be still to come.
Scientists may not set off a chain reaction to blow the world into
eternity, but some of the more plausible prospects are scarcely less
disconcerting.
In the face of this apparently unnecessary condition men of good
will find themselves helpless or afraid to act. Some are the prey of a
profound pessimism. Others strike out blindly in counteraggression,
much of which is directed toward science itself. Torn from its
position of prestige, science is decried as a dangerous toy in the hands
of children who do not understand it. The conspicuous feature of
any period is likely to be blamed for its troubles, and in the
twentieth century science must play the scapegoat. But the attack is
not entirely without justification. Science has developed unevenly.
By seizing upon the easier problems first, it has extended our control
of inanimate nature without preparing for the serious social problems
which follow. The technologies based upon science are disturbing.
Isolated groups of relatively stable people are brought into contact
with each other and lose their equilibrium. Industries spring up for
which the life of a community may be unprepared, while others
vanish leaving millions unfit for productive work. The application of
science prevents famines and plagues, and lowers death rates—only to
populate the earth beyond the reach of established systems of
cultural or governmental control. Science has made war more terrible
and more destructive. Much of this has not been done deliberately,
but it has

CAN SCIENCE HELP?

5

been done. And since scientists are necessarily men of some
intelligence, they might have been expected to be alert to these
consequences.
It is not surprising to encounter the proposal that science should
be abandoned, at least for the time being. This solution appeals
especially to those who are fitted by temperament to other ways of
life. Some relief might be obtained if we could divert mankind
into a revival of the arts or religion or even of that petty quarreling
which we now look back upon as a life of peace. Such a program
resembles the decision of the citizens of Samuel Butler's Erewhon,
where the instruments and products of science were put into
museums—as vestiges of a stage in the evolution of human
culture which did not survive. But not everyone is willing to
defend a position of stubborn "not knowing." There is no virtue in
ignorance for its own sake. Unfortunately we cannot stand still: to
bring scientific research to an end now would mean a return to
famine and pestilence and the exhausting labors of a slave culture.
SCIENCE AS A CORRECTIVE
Another solution is more appealing to the modern mind. It may
not be science which is wrong but only its application. The methods
of science have been enormously successful wherever they have been
tried. Let us then apply them to human affairs. We need not retreat in
those sectors where science has already advanced. It is necessary
only to bring our understanding of human nature up to the same
point. Indeed, this may well be our only hope. If we can observe
'human behavior carefully from an objective point of view and come
to understand it for what it is, we may be able to adopt a. more
sensible course of action. The need for establishing some such
balance is now widely felt, and those who are able to control the
direction of science are acting accordingly. It is understood that there
is no point in furthering a science of nature unless it includes a
sizable science of human nature, because only in that case will the
results be wisely used. It is possible that science has come to the
rescue and that order will eventually be achieved in the field of human
affairs.

6

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

THE THREAT TO FREEDOM
There is one difficulty, however. The application of science to
human behavior is not so simple as it seems. Most of those who
advocate it are simply looking for "the facts." To them science is
little more than careful observation. They want to evaluate human
behavior as it really is rather than as it appears to be through
ignorance or prejudice, and then to make effective decisions and move
on rapidly to a happier world. But the way in which science has
been applied in other fields shows that something more is involved.
Science is not concerned just with "getting the facts," after which
one may act with greater wisdom in an unscientific fashion. Science
supplies its own wisdom. It leads to a new conception of a subject
matter, a new way of thinking about that part of the world to which
it has addressed itself. If we are to enjoy the advantages of science
in the field of human affairs, we must be prepared to adopt the
working model of behavior to which a science will inevitably lead.
But very few of those who advocate the application of scientific
method to current problems are willing to go that far.
Science is more than the mere description of events as they occur. It
is an attempt to discover order, to show that certain events stand in
lawful relations to other events. No practical technology can be
based upon science until such relations have been discovered. But
order is not only a possible end product; it is a working assumption
which must be adopted at the very start. We cannot apply the methods
of science to a subject matter which is assumed to move about
capriciously. Science not only describes, it predicts. It deals not only
with the past but with the future. Nor is prediction the last word: to
the extent that relevant conditions can be altered, or otherwise
controlled, the future can be controlled. If we are to use the methods
of science in the field of human affairs, we must assume that behavior
is lawful and determined. We must expect to discover that what a
man does is the result of specifiable conditions and that once these
conditions have been discovered, we can anticipate and to some
extent determine his actions.
This possibility is offensive to many people. It is opposed to a tra-

CAN SCIENCE HELP?

7

dition of long standing which regards man as a free agent, whose
behavior is the product, not of specifiable antecedent conditions, but
of spontaneous inner changes of course. Prevailing philosophies of
human nature recognize an internal "will" which has the power of
interfering with causal relationships and which makes the prediction
and control of behavior impossible. To suggest that we abandon this
view is to threaten many cherished beliefs—to undermine what
appears to be a stimulating and productive conception of human
nature. The alternative point of view insists upon recognizing coercive
forces in human conduct which we may prefer to disregard. It
challenges our aspirations, either worldly or otherworldly.
Regardless of how much we stand to gain from supposing that
human behavior is the proper subject matter of a science, no one
who is a product of Western civilization can do so without a
struggle. We simply do not want such a science.
Conflicts of this sort are not unknown in the history of science.
When Aesop's lion was shown a painting in which a man was
depicted killing a lion, he commented contemptuously, "The artist
was obviously a man." Primitive beliefs about man and his place in
nature are usually flattering. It has been the unfortunate
responsibility of science to paint more realistic pictures. The
Copernican theory of the solar system displaced man from his preeminent position at the center of things. Today we accept this
theory without emotion, but originally it met with enormous
resistance. Darwin challenged a practice of segregation in which man
set himself firmly apart from the animals, and the bitter struggle
which arose is not yet ended. But though Darwin put man in his
biological place, he did not deny him a possible position as master.
Special faculties or a special capacity for spontaneous, creative action
might have emerged in the process of evolution. When that distinction
is now questioned, a new threat arises.
There are many ways of hedging on the theoretical issue. It may be
insisted that a science of human behavior is impossible, that behavior
has certain essential features which forever keep it beyond the pale
of science. But although this argument may dissuade many people
from further inquiry, it is not likely to have any effect upon those

8

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

who are willing to try and see. Another objection frequently offered
is that science is appropriate up to a certain point, but that there
must always remain an area in which one can act only on faith or
with respect to a "value judgment": science may tell us how to deal
with human behavior, but just what is to be done must be decided in
an essentially nonscientific way. Or it may be argued that there is
another kind of science which is compatible with doctrines of
personal freedom. For example, the social sciences are sometimes said
to be fundamentally different from the natural sciences and not
concerned with the same kinds of lawfulness. Prediction and
control may be forsworn in favor of "interpretation" or some other
species of understanding. But the kinds of intellectual activities
exemplified by value judgments or by intuition or interpretation have
never been set forth clearly, nor have they yet shown any capacity
to work a change in our present predicament.
THE PRACTICAL ISSUE
Our current practices do not represent any well-defined theoretical
position. They are, in fact, thoroughly confused. At times we appear
to regard a man's behavior as spontaneous and responsible. At other
times we recognize that inner determination is at least not complete,
that the individual is not always to be held to account. We have not
been able to reject the slowly accumulating evidence that
circumstances beyond the individual are relevant. We sometimes
exonerate a man by pointing to "extenuating circumstances." We
no longer blame the uneducated for their ignorance or call the
unemployed lazy. We no longer hold children wholly accountable
for their delinquencies. "Ignorance of the law" is no longer wholly
inexcusable: "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do."
The insane have long since been cleared of responsibility for their
condition, and the kinds of neurotic or psychotic behavior to which
we now apply this extenuation are multiplying.
But we have not gone all the way. We regard the common man as
the product of his environment; yet we reserve the right to give
personal credit to great men for their achievements. (At the same
time we take a certain delight in proving that part of the output of

CAN SCIENCE HELP?

9

even such men is due to the "influence" of other men or to some
trivial circumstance in their personal history.) We want to believe
that right-minded men are moved by valid principles even though
we are willing to regard wrong-minded men as victims of
erroneous propaganda. Backward peoples may be the fault of a poor
culture, but we want to regard the elite as something more than the
product of a good culture. Though we observe that Moslem
children in general become Moslems while Christian children in
general become Christians, we are not willing to accept an
accident of birth as a basis for belief. We dismiss those who
disagree with us as victims of ignorance, but we regard the
promotion of our own religious beliefs as something more than
the arrangement of a particular environment.
All of this suggests that we are in transition. We have not wholly
abandoned the traditional philosophy of human nature; at the same
time we are far from adopting a scientific point of view without
reservation. We have accepted the assumption of determinism in
part; yet we allow our sympathies, our first allegiances, and our
personal aspirations to rise to the defense of the traditional view.
We are currently engaged in a sort of patchwork in which new
facts and methods are assembled in accordance with traditional
theories.
If this were a theoretical issue only, we would have no cause for
alarm; but theories affect practices. A scientific conception of
human behavior dictates one practice, a philosophy of personal
freedom another. Confusion in theory means confusion in practice.
The present unhappy condition of the world may in large measure
be traced to our vacillation. The principal issues in dispute
between nations, both in peaceful assembly and on the battlefield,
are intimately concerned with the problem of human freedom and
control. Totalitarianism or democracy, the state or the individual,
planned society or laissez-faire, the impression of cultures upon
alien peoples, economic determinism, individual initiative,
propaganda, education, ideological warfare—all concern the
fundamental nature of human behavior. We shall almost certainly
remain ineffective in solving these problems until we adopt a
consistent point of view.
We cannot really evaluate the issue until we understand the
alternatives. The traditional view of human nature in Western
culture

10

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

is well known. The conception of a free, responsible individual is
embedded in our language and pervades our practices, codes, and
beliefs. Given an example of human behavior, most people can
describe it immediately in terms of such a conception. The practice
is so natural that it is seldom examined. A scientific formulation, on
the other hand, is new and strange. Very few people have any notion
of the extent to which a science of human behavior is indeed
possible. In what way can the behavior of the individual or of groups
of individuals be predicted and controlled? What are laws of behavior
like? What over-all conception of the human organism as a behaving
system emerges? It is only when we have answered these questions,
at least in a preliminary fashion, that we may consider the
implications of a science of human behavior with respect to either a
theory of human nature or the management of human affairs.

CHAPTER

II

A SCIENCE OF BEHAVIOR

The immediate tangible results of science make it
easier to appraise than philosophy, poetry, art, or theology. As
George Sarton has pointed out, science is unique in showing a
cumulative progress. Newton explained his tremendous
achievements by saying that he stood on the shoulders of
giants. All scientists, whether giants or not, enable those who
follow them to begin a little further along. This is not
necessarily true elsewhere. Our contemporary writers, artists,
and philosophers are not appreciably more effective than those
of the golden age of Greece, yet the average high-school
student understands much more of nature than the greatest
of Greek scientists. A comparison of the effectiveness of
Greek and modern science is scarcely worth making.
It is clear, then, that science "has something." It is a
unique intellectual process which yields remarkable results.
The danger is that its astonishing accomplishments may
conceal its true nature. This is especially important when we
extend the methods of science to a new field. The basic
characteristics of science are not restricted to any particular
subject matter. When we study physics, chemistry, or biology,
we study organized accumulations of information. These are
not science itself but the products of science. We may not be
able
11

12

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

to use much of this material when we enter new territory.
Nor should we allow ourselves to become enamored of
instruments of research. We tend to think of the scientist in
his observatory or laboratory, with his telescopes,
microscopes, and cyclotrons. Instruments give us a dramatic
picture of science in action. But although science could not
have gone very far without the devices which improve our
contact with the surrounding world, and although any
advanced science would be helpless without them, they are
not science itself. We should not be disturbed if familiar
instruments are lacking in a new field. Nor is science to be
identified with precise measurement or mathematical
calculation. It is better to be exact than inexact, and much of
modern science would be impossible without quantitative
observations and without the mathematical tools needed to
convert its reports into more general statements; but we may
measure or be mathematical without being scientific at all,
just as we may be scientific in an elementary way without
these aids.
SOME IMPORTANT CHARACTERISTICS OF SCIENCE
Science is first of all a set of attitudes. It is a disposition to
deal with the facts rather than with what someone has said
about them. Rejection of authority was the theme of the
revival of learning, when men dedicated themselves to the
study of "nature, not books." Science rejects even its own
authorities when they interfere with the observation of
nature.
Science is a willingness to accept facts even when they are
opposed to wishes. Thoughtful men have perhaps always
known that we are likely to see things as we want to see
them instead of as they are, but thanks to Sigmund Freud we
are today much more clearly aware of "wishful thinking."
The opposite of wishful thinking is intellectual honesty—an
extremely important possession of the successful scientist.
Scientists are by nature no more honest than other men but,
as Bridgman has pointed out, the practice of science puts an
exceptionally high premium on honesty. It is characteristic
of science that any lack of honesty quickly brings disaster.
Consider, for example, a scientist who conducts research to
test a theory for which he is

A SCIENCE OF BEHAVIOR

13

already well known. The result may confirm his theory,
contradict it, or leave it in doubt. In spite of any inclination
to the contrary, he must report a contradiction just as readily
as a confirmation. If he does not, someone else will—in a
matter of weeks or months or at most a few years—and this
will be more damaging to his prestige than if he himself had
reported it. Where right and wrong are not so easily or so
quickly established, there is no similar pressure. In the long
run, the issue is not so much one of personal prestige as of
effective procedure. Scientists have simply found that being
honest —with oneself as much as with others—is essential
to progress. Experiments do not always come out as one
expects, but the facts must stand and the expectations fall.
The subject matter, not the scientist, knows best. The same
practical consequences have created the scientific
atmosphere in which statements are constantly submitted to
check, where nothing is put above a precise description of
the facts, and where facts are accepted no matter how
distasteful their momentary consequences.
Scientists have also discovered the value of remaining
without an answer until a satisfactory one can be found.
This is a difficult lesson. It takes considerable training to
avoid premature conclusions, to refrain from making
statements on insufficient evidence, and to avoid
explanations which are pure invention. Yet the history of
science has demonstrated again and again the advantage of
these practices.
Science is, of course, more than a set of attitudes. It is a
search for order, for uniformities, for lawful relations among
the events in nature. It begins, as we all begin, by observing
single episodes, but it quickly passes on to the general rule,
to scientific law. Something very much like the order
expressed in a scientific law appears in our behavior at an
early age. We learn the rough geometry of the space in
which we move. We learn the "laws of motion" as we move
about, or push and pull objects, or throw and catch them. If
we could not find some uniformity in the world, our conduct
would remain haphazard and ineffective. Science sharpens
and supplements this experience by demonstrating more and
more relations among events and by demonstrating them
more and more precisely. As Ernst Mach

14

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

showed in tracing the history of the science of mechanics,
the earliest laws of science were probably the rules used by
craftsmen and artisans in training apprentices. The rules
saved time because the experienced craftsman could teach an
apprentice a variety of details in a single formula. By
learning a rule the apprentice could deal with particular
cases as they arose.
In a later stage science advances from the collection of
rules or laws to larger systematic arrangements. Not only
does it make statements about the world, it makes
statements about statements. It sets up a "model" of its
subject matter, which helps to generate new rules very much
as the rules themselves generate new practices in dealing
with single cases. A science may not reach this stage for
some time.
The scientific "system," like the law, is designed to enable
us to handle a subject matter more efficiently. What we call
the scientific conception of a thing is not passive
knowledge. Science is not concerned with contemplation.
When we have discovered the laws which govern a part of
the world about us, and when we have organized these laws
into a system, we are then ready to deal effectively with that
part of the world. By predicting the occurrence of an event
we are able to prepare for it. By arranging conditions in
ways specified by the laws of a system, we not only predict,
we control: we "cause" an event to occur or to assume
certain characteristics.
BEHAVIOR AS A SCIENTIFIC SUBJECT MATTER
Behavior is not one of those subject matters which
become accessible only with the invention of an instrument
such as the telescope or microscope. We all know thousands
of facts about behavior. Actually there is no subject matter
with which we could be better acquainted, for we are always
in the presence of at least one behaving organism. But this
familiarity is something of a disadvantage, for it means that
we have probably jumped to conclusions which will not be
supported by the cautious methods of science. Even though
we have observed behavior for many years, we are not
necessarily able, without help, to express useful uniformities
or lawful relations. We may show considerable skill in
making plausible guesses about what

A SCIENCE OF BEHAVIOR

15

our friends and acquaintances will do under various
circumstances or what we ourselves will do. We may make
plausible generalizations about the conduct of people in
general. But very few of these will survive careful analysis.
A great deal of unlearning generally takes place in our early
contact with a science of behavior.
Behavior is a difficult subject matter, not because it is
inaccessible, but because it is extremely complex. Since it is
a process, rather than a thing, it cannot easily be held still
for observation. It is changing, fluid, and evanescent, and
for this reason it makes great technical demands upon the
ingenuity and energy of the scientist. But there is nothing
essentially insoluble about the problems which arise from
this fact.
Several kinds of statements about behavior are commonly
made. When we tell an anecdote or pass along a bit of
gossip, we report a single event—what someone did upon
such and such an occasion: "She slammed the door and
walked off without a word." Our report is a small bit of
history. History itself is often nothing more than similar
reporting on a broad scale. The biographer often confines
himself to a series of episodes in the life of his subject. The
case history, which occupies an important place in several
fields of psychology, is a kind of biography which is also
concerned mainly with what a particular person did at
particular times and places: "When she was eleven, Mary
went to live with her maiden aunt in Winchester." Novels
and short stories may be thought of as veiled biography or
history, since the ingredients of even a highly fanciful work
of fiction are somehow or other taken from life. The narrative
reporting of the behavior of people at particular times and
places is also part of the sciences of archeology, ethnology,
sociology, and anthropology.
These accounts have their uses. They broaden the
experience of those who have not had firsthand access to
similar data. But they are only the beginnings of a science.
No matter how accurate or quantitative it may be, the report
of the single case is only a preliminary step. The next step is
the discovery of some sort of uniformity. When we tell an
anecdote to support an argument, or report a case history to
exemplify a principle, we imply a general rule, no matter
how

16

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

vaguely it may be expressed. The historian is seldom
content with mere narration. He reports his facts to support
a theory—of cycles, trends, or patterns of history. In doing
so he passes from the single' instance to the rule. When a
biographer traces the influence of an early event upon a
man's later life, he transcends simple reporting and asserts,
no matter how hesitantly, that one thing has caused another.
Fable and allegory are more than storytelling if they imply
some kind of uniformity in human behavior, as they
generally do. Our preference for "consistency of character"
and our rejection of implausible coincidences in literature
show that we expect lawfulness. The "manners" and
"customs" of the sociologist and anthropologist report the
general behavior of groups of people.
A vague sense of order emerges from any sustained
observation of human behavior. Any plausible guess about
what a friend will do or say in a given circumstance is a
prediction based upon some such uniformity. If a reasonable
order was not discoverable, we could scarcely be effective
in dealing with human affairs. The methods of science are
designed to clarify these uniformities and make them
explicit. The techniques of field study of the anthropologist
and social psychologist, the procedures of the psychological
clinic, and the controlled experimental methods of the
laboratory are all directed toward this end, as are also the
mathematical and logical tools of science.
Many people interested in human behavior do not feel the
need for the standards of proof characteristic of an exact
science; the uniformities in behavior are "obvious" without
them. At the same time, they are reluctant to accept the
conclusions toward which such proof inescapably points if
they do not "sense" the uniformity themselves. But these
idiosyncrasies are a costly luxury. We need not defend the
methods of science in their application to behavior. The
experimental and mathematical techniques used in
discovering and expressing uniformities are the common
property of science in general. Almost every discipline has
contributed to this pool of resources, and all disciplines
borrow from it. The advantages are well established.

A SCIENCE OF BEHAVIOR

17

SOME OBJECTIONS TO A SCIENCE OF BEHAVIOR
The report of a single event raises no theoretical
problems and comes into no conflict with philosophies of
human behavior. The scientific laws or systems which
express uniformities are likely to conflict with theory
because they claim the same territory. When a science of
behavior reaches the point of dealing with lawful
relationships, it meets the resistance of those who give
their allegiance to prescientific or extrascientific
conceptions. The resistance does not always take the form
of an overt rejection of science. It may be transmuted into
claims of limitations, often expressed in highly scientific
terms.
It has sometimes been pointed out, for example, that
physical science has been unable to maintain its philosophy of
determinism, particularly at the subatomic level. The Principle
of Indeterminacy states that there are circumstances under
which the physicist cannot put himself in possession of all
relevant information: if he chooses to observe one event, he
must relinquish the possibility of observing another. In our
present state of knowledge, certain events therefore appear to
be unpredictable. It does not follow that these events are free
or capricious. Since human behavior is enormously complex and
the human organism is of limited dimensions, many acts may
involve processes to which the Principle of Indeterminacy
applies. It does not follow that human behavior is free, but
only that it may be beyond the range of a predictive or
controlling science. Most students of behavior, however,
would be willing to settle for the degree of prediction and
control achieved by the physical sciences in spite of this
limitation. A final answer to the problem of lawfulness is to be
sought, not in the limits of any hypothetical mechanism
within the organism, but in our ability to demonstrate
lawfulness in the behavior of the organism as a whole.
A similar objection has a logical flavor. It is contended that
reason cannot comprehend itself or—in somewhat more
substantial terms— that the behavior required in understanding
one's own behavior must be something beyond the behavior
which is understood. It is true that knowledge is limited by the
limitations of the knowing organism.

18

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

The number of things in the world which might be known
certainly I exceeds the number of possible different states in all
possible knowers, But the laws and systems of science are
designed to make a knowledge of particular events
unimportant. It is by no means necessary that one man
should understand all the facts in a given field, but only
that he should understand all the kinds of facts. We have
no reason to suppose that the human intellect is incapable of
formulating or comprehending the basic principles of human
behavior—certainly not until we have a clearer notion of
what those principles are. The assumption that behavior is a
lawful scientific datum sometimes meets with another
objection. Science is concerned with the general, but the
behavior of the individual is necessarily unique. The "case
history" has a richness and flavor which are in decided
contrast with general principles. It is easy to convince
oneself that there are two distinct worlds and that one is
beyond the reach of science. This distinction is not
peculiar to the study of behavior. It can always be made in
the early stages of any science, when it is not clear what we
may deduce from a general principle with respect to a
particular case. What the science of physics has to say about
the world is dull and colorless to the beginning student when
compared with his daily experience, but he later discovers
that it is actually a more incisive account of even the single
instance. When we wish to deal effectively with the single
instance, we turn to science for help. The argument will lose
cogency as a science of behavior progresses and as the
implications of its general laws become clear. A
comparable argument against the possibility of a science of
medicine has already lost its significance. In War and Peace,
Tolstoy wrote of the illness of a favorite character as follows:
Doctors came to see Natasha, both separately and in
consultation. They said a great deal in French, in German,
and in Latin. They criticised one another, and prescribed the
most diverse remedies for all the diseases they were familiar
with. But it never occurred to one of them to make the
simple reflection that they could not understand the disease
from which Natasha was suffering, as no single disease can
be fully understood in a living person; for every living
person has his individual peculiarities and always has his
own peculiar, new, complex complaints unknown to
medicine—not a disease of the lungs, of the kidneys, of the
skin, of the

A SCIENCE OF BEHAVIOR

19

heart, and so on, as described in medical books, but a disease
that consists of one out of the innumerable combinations of
ailments of those organs.
Tolstoy was justified in calling every sickness a unique event.
Every action of the individual is unique, as well as every
event in physics and chemistry. But his objection to a science
of medicine in terms of uniqueness was unwarranted. The
argument was plausible enough at the time; no one could then
contradict him by supplying the necessary general principles.
But a great deal has happened in medical science since then,
and today few people would care to argue that a disease
cannot be described in general terms or that a single case
cannot be discussed by referring to factors common to many
cases. The intuitive wisdom of the old-style diagnostician has
been largely replaced by the analytical procedures of the clinic,
just as a scientific analysis of behavior will eventually replace
the personal interpretation of unique instances.
A similar argument is leveled at the use of statistics in a
science of behavior. A prediction of what the average
individual will do is often of little or no value in dealing with
a particular individual. The actuarial tables of life-insurance
companies are of no value to a physician in predicting the
death or survival of a particular patient. This issue is still alive
in the physical sciences, where it is associated with the
concepts of causality and probability. It is seldom that the
science of physics deals with the behavior of individual
molecules, atoms, or subatomic particles. When it is
occasionally called upon to do so, all the problems of the
particular event arise. In general a science is helpful in
dealing with the individual only insofar as its laws refer to
individuals. A science of behavior which concerns only the
behavior of groups is not likely to be of help in our
understanding of the particular case. But a science may also
deal with the behavior of the individual, and its success in
doing so must be evaluated in terms of its achievements rather
than any a priori contentions.
The extraordinary complexity of behavior is sometimes
held to be an added source of difficulty. Even though
behavior may be lawful, it may be too complex to be dealt
with in terms of law. Sir Oliver Lodge once asserted that
"though an astronomer can calculate the orbit of a planet or
comet or even a meteor, although a physicist

20

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

can deal with the structure of atoms, and a chemist with their
possible combinations, neither a biologist nor any scientific
man can calculate the orbit of a common fly." This is a
statement about the limitations of scientists or about their
aspirations, not about the suitability of a subject matter. Even
so, it is wrong. It may be said with some assurance that if no
one has calculated the orbit of a fly, it is only because no one
has been sufficiently interested in doing so. The tropistic
movements of many insects are now fairly well understood,
but the instrumentation needed to record the flight of a fly
and to give an account of all the conditions affecting it would
cost more than the importance of the subject justifies. There is,
therefore, no reason to conclude, as, the author does, that "an
incalculable element of self-determination thus makes its
appearance quite low down the animal scale." Selfdetermination does not follow from complexity. Difficulty in
calculating the orbit of the fly does not prove capriciousness,
though it may make it impossible to prove anything else. The
problems imposed by the complexity of a subject matter
must be dealt with as they arise. Apparently hopeless cases
often become manageable in time. It is only recently that any
sort of lawful account of the weather has been possible. We
often succeed in reducing complexity to a reasonable degree by
simplifying conditions in the laboratory; but where this is
impossible, a statistical analysis may be used to achieve an
inferior, but in many ways acceptable, prediction. Certainly
no one is prepared to say now what a science of behavior can
or cannot accomplish eventually. Advance estimates of the
limits of science have generally proved inaccurate. The issue
is in the long run pragmatic: we cannot tell until we have
tried.
Still another objection to the use of scientific method in the
study of human behavior is that behavior is an anomalous
subject matter because a prediction made about it may alter
it. If we tell a friend that he is going to buy a particular kind
of car, he may react to our prediction by buying a different
kind. The same effect has been used to explain the failures of
public opinion polls. In the presidential election of 1948 it
was confidently predicted that a majority of the voters would
vote for a candidate who, as it turned out, lost the election. It
has been asserted that the electorate reacted to the pre-

A SCIENCE OF BEHAVIOR

21

diction in a contrary way and that the published prediction
therefore had an effect upon the predicted event. But it is by
no means necessary that a prediction of behavior be
permitted to affect the behaving individual. There may have
been practical reasons why the results of the poll in
question could not be withheld until after the election, but
this would not be the case in a purely scientific endeavor.
There are other ways in which observer and observed
interact. Study distorts the thing studied. But there is no
special problem here peculiar to human behavior. It is now
accepted as a general principle in scientific method that it is
necessary to interfere in some degree with any phenomenon
in the act of observing it. A scientist may have an effect
upon behavior in the act of observing or analyzing it, and he
must certainly take this effect into account. But behavior
may also be observed with a minimum of interaction
between subject and scientist, and this is the case with
which one naturally tries to begin.
A final objection deals with the practical application of a
scientific analysis. Even if we assume that behavior is
lawful and that the methods of science will reveal the rules
which govern it, we may be unable to make any
technological use of these rules unless certain conditions
can be brought under control. In the laboratory many
conditions are simplified and irrelevant conditions often
eliminated. But of what value are laboratory studies if we
must predict and control behavior where a comparable
simplification is impossible? It is true that we can gain
control over behavior only insofar as we can control the
factors responsible for it. What a scientific study does is to
enable us to make optimal use of the control we possess.
The laboratory simplification reveals the relevance of
factors which we might otherwise overlook.
We cannot avoid the problems raised by a science of
behavior by simply denying that the necessary conditions
can be controlled. In actual fact there is a considerable
degree of control over many relevant conditions. In penal
institutions and military organizations the control is
extensive. We control the environment of the human
organism in the nursery and in institutions which care for
those to whom the conditions of the nursery remain
necessary in later life.

22

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

Fairly extensive control of conditions relevant to human
behavior is maintained in industry in the form of wages and
conditions of work in schools in the form of grades and
conditions of work, in commerce by anyone in possession of
goods or money, by governmental agencies through the police
and military, in the psychological clinic through the consent of
the controllee, and so on. A degree of effective control not so
easily identified, rests in the hands of entertainers, writers
advertisers, and propagandists. These controls, which are
often al too evident in their practical application, are more
than sufficient to permit us to extend the results of a laboratory
science to the interpretation of human behavior in daily affairs
—for either theoretical or practical purposes. Since a science
of behavior will continue to increase the effective use of this
control, it is now more important than ever to understand the
processes involved and to prepare ourselves for the problems
which will certainly arise.

CHAPTER

III

WHY ORGANISMS BEHAVE

The terms "cause" and "effect" are no longer widely
used in science. They have been associated with so many
theories of the structure and operation of the universe that
they mean more than scientists want to say. The terms which
replace them, however, refer to the same factual core. A
"cause" becomes a "change in an independent variable" and
an "effect" a "change in a dependent variable." The old
"cause-and-effect connection" becomes a "functional
relation." The new terms do not suggest how a cause causes
its effect; they merely assert that different events tend to
occur together in a certain order. This is important, but it is
not crucial. There is no particular danger in using "cause"
and "effect" in an informal discussion if we are always ready
to substitute their more exact counterparts.
We are concerned, then, with the causes of human
behavior. We want to know why men behave as they do.
Any condition or event which can be shown to have an
effect upon behavior must be taken into account. By
discovering and analyzing these causes we can predict
behavior; to the extent that we can manipulate them, we can
control behavior.
There is a curious inconsistency in the zeal with which the
doctrine
23

24

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

of personal freedom has been defended, because men have
always I been fascinated by the search for causes. The
spontaneity of human I behavior is apparently no more
challenging than its "why and wherefore." So strong is the
urge to explain behavior that men have been led to
anticipate legitimate scientific inquiry and to construct
highly | implausible theories of causation. This practice is
not unusual in the history of science. The study of any
subject begins in the realm of superstition. The fanciful
explanation precedes the valid. Astronomy began as
astrology; chemistry as alchemy. The field of behavior has
had, and still has, its astrologers and alchemists. A long
history of prescientific explanation furnishes us with a
fantastic array of causes which have no function other than
to supply spurious answers to questions which must
otherwise go unanswered in the early stages of a science.
SOME POPULAR "CAUSES" OF BEHAVIOR
Any conspicuous event which coincides with human
behavior is likely to be seized upon as a cause. The
position of the planets at the birth of the individual is an
example. Usually astrologers do not try to predict specific
actions from such causes, but when they tell us that a man
will be impetuous, careless, or thoughtful, we must
suppose that specific actions are assumed to be affected.
Numerology finds a different set of causes—for example,
in the numbers which compose the street address of the
individual or in the number of letters in his name. Millions
of people turn to these spurious causes every year in their
desperate need to understand human behavior and to deal
with it effectively.
The predictions of astrologers, numerologists, and the
like are usually so vague that they cannot be confirmed or
disproved properly. Failures are easily overlooked, while an
occasional chance hit is dramatic enough to maintain the
behavior of the devotee in considerable strength. Certain
valid relations which resemble such superstitions offer
spurious support. For example, some characteristics of
behavior can be traced to the season in which a man is born
(though not to the position of the planets at his birth), as
well as to climatic conditions due in part to the position of
the earth in the

WHY ORGANISMS BEHAVE

25

solar system or to events in the sun. Effects of this sort, when
properly validated, must not be overlooked. They do not, of course,
justify astrology.
Another common practice is to explain behavior in terms of the
structure of the individual. The proportions of the body, the shape
of the head, the color of the eyes, skin, or hair, the marks on the
palms of the hands, and the features of the face have all been said
to determine what a man will do. The "jovial fat man," Cassius with
his "lean and hungry look," and thousands of other characters or
types thoroughly embedded in our language affect our practices in
dealing with human behavior. A specific act may never be predicted
from physique, but different types of personality imply
predispositions to behave in different ways, so that specific acts are
presumed to be affected. This practice resembles the mistake we all
make when we expect someone who looks like an old
acquaintance to behave like him also. When a "type"' is once
established, it survives in everyday use because the predictions
which are made with it, like those of astrology, are vague, and
occasional hits may be startling. Spurious support is also offered by
many valid relations between behavior and body type. Studies of the
physiques of men and women predisposed to different sorts of
disorders have from time to time held the attention of students of
behavior. The most recent classification of body structure—the
somatotyping of W. H. Sheldon—has already been applied to the
prediction of temperament and of various forms of delinquency.
Valid relations between behavior and body type must, of course, be
taken into account in a science of behavior, but these should not be
confused with the relations invoked in the uncritical practice of the
layman.
Even when a correlation between behavior and body structure is
demonstrated, it is not always clear which is the cause of which. Even
if it could be shown by proper statistical methods that fat men are
especially likely to be jolly, it still would not follow that the physique
causes the temperament. Fat people are at a disadvantage in many
ways, and they may develop jolly behavior as a special competitive
technique. Jolly people may grow fat because they are free of the
emotional disturbances which drive other people to overwork or to

26

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

neglect their diet or their health. Fat people may be jolly
because they have been successful in satisfying their needs
through excessive eating. Where the feature of physique can
be modified, then, we must ask whether the behavior or the
feature comes first.
When we find, or think we have found, that conspicuous
physical features explain part of a man's behavior, it is
tempting to suppose that inconspicuous features explain
other parts. This is implied in the assertion that a man shows
certain behavior because he was "born that way." To object to
this is not to argue that behavior is never determined by
hereditary factors. Behavior requires a behaving organism
which is the product of a genetic process. Gross differences in
the behavior of different species show that the genetic
constitution, whether observed in the body structure of the
individual or inferred from a genetic history, is important.
But the doctrine of "being born that way" has little to do
with demonstrated facts. It is usually an appeal to ignorance.
"Heredity," as the layman uses the term, is a fictional
explanation of the behavior attributed to it.
Even when it can be shown that some aspect of behavior
is due to season of birth, gross body type, or genetic
constitution, the fact is of limited use. It may help us in
predicting behavior, but it is of little value in an experimental
analysis or in practical control because such a condition cannot
be manipulated after the individual has been conceived. The
most that can be said is that the knowledge of the genetic factor
may enable us to make better use of other causes. If we know
that an individual has certain inherent limitations, we may
use our techniques of control more intelligently, but we
cannot alter the genetic factor.
The practical deficiencies of programs involving causes of
this sort may explain some of the vehemence with which they
are commonly debated. Many people study human behavior
because they want to do something about it—they want to
make men happier, more efficient and productive, less
aggressive, and so on. To these people, inherited determiners
—as epitomized in various "racial types" —appear to be
insurmountable barriers, since they leave no course of action
but the slow and doubtful program of eugenics. The evidence
for genetic traits is therefore closely scrutinized, and any
indication

WHY ORGANISMS BEHAVE

27

that it is weak or inconsistent is received with enthusiasm.
But the practical issue must not be allowed to interfere in
determining the extent to which behavioral dispositions are
inherited. The matter is not so crucial as is often supposed,
for we shall see that there are other types of causes available
for those who want quicker results.
INNER "CAUSES"
Every science has at some time or other looked for causes of
action inside the things it has studied. Sometimes the practice
has proved useful, sometimes it has not. There is nothing
wrong with an inner explanation as such, but events which are
located inside a system are likely to be difficult to observe. For
this reason we are encouraged to assign properties to them
without justification. Worse still, we can invent causes of this
sort without fear of contradiction. The motion of a rolling
stone was once attributed to its vis viva. The chemical
properties of bodies were thought to be derived from the
principles or essences of which they were composed.
Combustion was explained by the phlogiston inside the
combustible object. Wounds healed and bodies grew well
because of a vis medicatrix. It has been especially tempting to
attribute the behavior of a living organism to the behavior of
an inner agent, as the following examples may suggest.
Neural causes. The layman uses the nervous system as a
ready explanation of behavior. The English language contains
hundreds of expressions which imply such a causal
relationship. At the end of a long trial we read that the jury
shows signs of brain fag, that the nerves of the accused are on
edge, that the wife of the accused is on the verge of a nervous
breakdown, and that his lawyer is generally thought to have
lacked the brains needed to stand up to the prosecution.
Obviously, no direct observations have been made of the nervous
systems of any of these people. Their "brains" and "nerves"
have been invented on the spur of the moment to lend
substance to what might otherwise seem a superficial account
of their behavior.
The sciences of neurology and physiology have not divested
themselves entirely of a similar practice. Since techniques for
observing the electrical and chemical processes in nervous
tissue had not yet

28

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

been developed, early information about the nervous system
was limited to its gross anatomy. Neural processes could
only be inferred from the behavior which was said to result
from them. Such inferences were legitimate enough as
scientific theories, but they could not justifiably be used to
explain the very behavior upon which they were based. The
hypotheses of the early physiologist may have been sounder
than those of the layman, but until independent evidence
could be obtained, they were no more satisfactory as
explanations of behavior. Direct information about many of
the chemical and electrical processes in the nervous system
is now available. Statements about the nervous system are
no longer necessarily inferential or fictional. But there is
still a measure of circularity in much physiological
explanation, even in the writings of specialists. In World
War I a familiar disorder was called "shell shock."
Disturbances in behavior were explained by arguing that
violent explosions had damaged the structure of the nervous
system, though no direct evidence of such damage was
available. In World War II the same disorder was classified
as "neuropsychiatric." The prefix seems to show a continuing
unwillingness to abandon explanations in terms of
hypothetical neural damage.
Eventually a science of the nervous system based upon
direct observation rather than inference will describe the
neural states and events which immediately precede
instances of behavior. We shall know the precise
neurological conditions which immediately precede, say, the
response, "No, thank you." These events in turn will be
found to be preceded by other neurological events, and these
in turn by others. This series will lead us back to events
outside the nervous system and, eventually, outside the
organism. In the chapters which follow we shall consider
external events of this sort in some detail. We shall then be
better able to evaluate the place of neurological explanations
of behavior. However, we may note here that we do not have
and may never have this sort of neurological information at
the moment it is needed in order to predict a specific
instance of behavior. It is even more unlikely that we shall
be able to alter the nervous system directly in order to set up
the antecedent conditions of a particular instance. The
causes to be sought in the nervous sys-

WHY ORGANISMS BEHAVE

29

tem are, therefore, of limited usefulness in the prediction and
control of specific behavior.
Psychic inner causes. An even more common practice is to
explain behavior in terms of an inner agent which lacks
physical dimensions and is called "mental" or "psychic." The
purest form of the psychic explanation is seen in the animism
of primitive peoples. From the immobility of the body after
death it is inferred that a spirit responsible for movement has
departed. The enthusiastic person is, as the etymology of the
word implies, energized by a "god within." It is only a
modest refinement to attribute every feature of the behavior of
the physical organism to a corresponding feature of the
"mind" or of some inner "personality." The inner man is
regarded as driving the body very much as the man at the
steering wheel drives a car. The inner man wills an action,
the outer executes it. The inner loses his appetite, the outer
stops eating. The inner man wants and the outer gets. The
inner has the impulse which the outer obeys.
It is not the layman alone who resorts to these practices, for
many reputable psychologists use a similar dualistic system of
explanation. The inner man is sometimes personified clearly, as
when delinquent behavior is attributed to a "disordered
personality," or he may be dealt with in fragments, as when
behavior is attributed to mental processes, faculties, and traits.
Since the inner man does not occupy space, he may be
multiplied at will. It has been argued that a single physical
organism is controlled by several psychic agents and that its
behavior is the resultant of their several wills. The Freudian
concepts of the ego, superego, and id are often used in this
way. They are frequently regarded as nonsubstantial creatures,
often in violent conflict, whose defeats or victories lead to the
adjusted or maladjusted behavior of the physical organism in
which they reside.
Direct observation of the mind comparable with the
observation of the nervous system has not proved feasible. It
is true that many people believe that they observe their
"mental states" just as the physiologist observes neural
events, but another interpretation of what they observe is
possible, as we shall see in Chapter XVII. Introspective
psychology no longer pretends to supply direct information

30

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

about events which are the causal antecedents, rather than
the mere accompaniments, of behavior. It defines its
"subjective" events in ways which strip them of any
usefulness in a causal analysis. The events appealed to in
early mentalistic explanations of behavior have remained
beyond the reach of observation. Freud insisted upon this by
emphasizing the role of the unconscious—a frank
recognition that important mental processes are not directly
observable. The Freudian literature supplies many examples
of behavior from which unconscious wishes, impulses,
instincts, and emotions are inferred. Unconscious thoughtprocesses have also been used to explain intellectual
achievements. Though the mathematician may feel that he
knows "how he thinks," he is often unable to give a coherent
account of the mental processes leading to the solution of a
specific problem. But any mental event which is
unconscious is necessarily inferential, and the explanation is
therefore not based upon independent observations of a valid
cause.
The fictional nature of this form of inner cause is shown
by the ease with which the mental process is discovered to
have just the properties needed to account for the behavior.
When a professor turns up in the wrong classroom or gives
the wrong lecture, it is because his mind is, at least for the
moment, absent. If he forgets to give a reading assignment,
it is because it has slipped his mind (a hint from the class
may remind him of it). He begins to tell an old joke but
pauses for a moment, and it is evident to everyone that he is
trying to make up his mind whether or not he has already
used the joke that term. His lectures grow more tedious with
the years, and questions from the class confuse him more
and more, because his mind is failing. What he says is often
disorganized because his ideas are confused. He is
occasionally unnecessarily emphatic because of the force of
his ideas. When he repeats himself, it is because he has an
idee fixe; and when he repeats what others have said, it is
because he borrows his ideas. Upon occasion there is
nothing in what he says because he lacks ideas. In all this it
is obvious that the mind and the ideas, together with their
special characteristics, are being invented on the spot to
provide spurious explanations. A science of behavior can
hope to gain very little from so cavalier a practice. Since
mental

WHY ORGANISMS BEHAVE

31

or psychic events are asserted to lack the dimensions of
physical science, we have an additional reason for rejecting
them.
Conceptual inner causes. The commonest inner causes
have no specific dimensions at all, either neurological or
psychic. When we say that a man eats because he is hungry,
smokes a great deal because he has the tobacco habit, fights
because of the instinct of pugnacity, behaves brilliantly because
of his intelligence, or plays the piano well because of his musical
ability, we seem to be referring to causes. But on analysis these
phrases prove to be merely redundant descriptions. A single set
of facts is described by the two statements: "He eats" and "He
is hungry." A single set of facts is described by the two
statements: "He smokes a great deal" and "He has the
smoking habit." A single set of facts is described by the two
statements: "He plays well" and "He has musical ability." The
practice of explaining one statement in terms of the other is
dangerous because it suggests that we have found the cause and
therefore need search no further. Moreover, such terms as
"hunger," "habit," and "intelligence" convert what are
essentially the properties of a process or relation into what
appear to be things. Thus we are unprepared for the properties
eventually to be discovered in the behavior itself and
continue to look for something which may not exist.
THE VARIABLES OF WHICH BEHAVIOR IS A
FUNCTION
The practice of looking inside the organism for an
explanation of behavior has tended to obscure the variables
which are immediately available for a scientific analysis.
These variables lie outside the organism, in its immediate
environment and in its environmental history. They have a
physical status to which the usual techniques of science are
adapted, and they make it possible to explain behavior as other
subjects are explained in science. These independent variables
are of many sorts and their relations to behavior are often
subtle and complex, but we cannot hope to give an adequate
account of behavior without analyzing them.
Consider the act of drinking a glass of water. This is not
likely to be an important bit of behavior in anyone's life, but
it supplies a

32

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

convenient example. We may describe the topography of the
behavior in such a way that a given instance may be
identified quite accurately by any qualified observer.
Suppose now we bring someone into a room and place a
glass of water before him. Will he drink? There appear to be
only two possibilities: either he will or he will not. But we
speak of the chances that he will drink, and this notion may
be refined for scientific use. What we want to evaluate is the
probability that he will drink. This may range from virtual
certainty that drinking will occur to virtual certainty that it
will not. The very considerable problem of how to measure
such a probability will be discussed later. For the moment,
we are interested in how the probability may be increased or
decreased.
Everyday experience suggests several possibilities, and
laboratory and clinical observations have added others. It is
decidedly not true that a horse may be led to water but
cannot be made to drink. By arranging a history of severe
deprivation we could be "absolutely sure" that drinking
would occur. In the same way we may be sure that the glass
of water in our experiment will be drunk. Although we are
not likely to arrange them experimentally, deprivations of
the necessary magnitude sometimes occur outside the
laboratory. We may obtain an effect similar to that of
deprivation by speeding up the excretion of water. For
example, we may induce sweating by raising the
temperature of the room or by forcing heavy exercise, or we
may increase the excretion of urine by mixing salt or urea in
food taken prior to the experiment. It is also well known that
loss of blood, as on a battlefield, sharply increases the
probability of drinking. On the other hand, we may set the
probability at virtually zero by inducing or forcing our
subject to drink a large quantity of water before the
experiment.
If we are to predict whether or not our subject will drink,
we must know as much as possible about these variables. If
we are to induce him to drink, we must be able to
manipulate them. In both cases, moreover, either for
accurate prediction or control, we must investigate the effect
of each variable quantitatively with the methods and
techniques of a laboratory science.
Other variables may, of course, affect the result. Our
subject may

WHY ORGANISMS BEHAVE

33

be "afraid" that something has been added to the water as a
practical joke or for experimental purposes. He may even
"suspect" that the water has been poisoned. He may have
grown up in a culture in which water is drunk only when no
one is watching. He may refuse to drink simply to prove
that we cannot predict or control his behavior. These
possibilities do not disprove the relations between drinking
and the variables listed in the preceding paragraphs; they
simply remind us that other variables may have to be taken
into account. We must know the history of our subject with
respect to the behavior of drinking water, and if we cannot
eliminate social factors from the situation, then we must
know the history of his personal relations to people
resembling the experimenter. Adequate prediction in any
science requires information about all relevant variables,
and the control of a subject matter for practical purposes
makes the same demands.
Other types of "explanation" do not permit us to dispense
with these requirements or to fulfill them in any easier way.
It is of no help to be told that our subject will drink provided
he was born under a particular sign of the zodiac which
shows a preoccupation with water or provided he is the lean
and thirsty type or was, in short, "born thirsty." Explanations
in terms of inner states or agents, however, may require
some further comment. To what extent is it helpful to be
told, "He drinks because he is thirsty"? If to be thirsty
means nothing more than to have a tendency to drink, this is
mere redundancy. If it means that he drinks because of a
state of thirst, an inner causal event is invoked. If this state
is purely inferential— if no dimensions are assigned to it
which would make direct observation possible—it cannot
serve as an explanation. But if it has physiological or
psychic properties, what role can it play in a science of
behavior?
The physiologist may point out that several ways of
raising the probability of drinking have a common effect:
they increase the concentration of solutions in the body.
Through some mechanism not yet well understood, this may
bring about a corresponding change in the nervous system
which in turn makes drinking more probable. In the same
way, it may be argued that all these operations make the
organ-

34

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

ism "feel thirsty" or "want a drink" and that such a psychic
state also acts upon the nervous system in some unexplained
way to induce drinking. In each case we have a causal chain
consisting of three links: (1) an operation performed upon
the organism from without— for example, water
deprivation; (2) an inner condition—for example,
physiological or psychic thirst; and (3) a kind of behavior—
for example, drinking. Independent information about the
second link would obviously permit us to predict the third
without recourse to the first. It would be a preferred type of
variable because it would be non-historic; the first link may
lie in the past history of the organism, but the second is a
current condition. Direct information about the second link
is, however, seldom, if ever, available. Sometimes we infer
the second link from the third: an animal is judged to be
thirsty if it drinks. In that case, the explanation is spurious.
Sometimes we infer the second link from the first: an animal
is said to be thirsty if it has not drunk for a long time. In that
case, we obviously cannot dispense with the prior history.
The second link is useless in the control of behavior unless
we can manipulate it. At the moment, we have no way of
directly altering neural processes at appropriate moments in
the life of a behaving organism, nor has any way been
discovered to alter a psychic process. We usually set up the
second link through the first: we make an animal thirsty, in
either the physiological or the psychic sense, by depriving it
of water, feeding it salt, and so on. In that case, the second
link obviously does not permit us to dispense with the first.
Even if some new technical discovery were to enable us to
set up or change the second link directly, we should still
have to deal with those enormous areas in which human
behavior is controlled through manipulation of the first link.
A technique of operating upon the second link would
increase our control of behavior, but the techniques which
have already been developed would still remain to be
analyzed.
The most objectionable practice is to follow the causal
sequence back only as far as a hypothetical second link. This
is a serious handicap both in a theoretical science and in the
practical control of behavior. It is no help to be told that to
get an organism to drink we

WHY ORGANISMS BEHAVE

35

are simply to "make it thirsty" unless we are also told how this
is to be done. When we have obtained the necessary
prescription for thirst, the whole proposal is more complex
than it need be. Similarly, when an example of maladjusted
behavior is explained by saying that the individual is "suffering
from anxiety," we have still to be told the cause of the anxiety.
But the external conditions which are then invoked could
have been directly related to the maladjusted behavior. Again,
when we are told that a man stole a loaf of bread because "he
was hungry," we have still to learn of the external conditions
responsible for the "hunger." These conditions would have
sufficed to explain the theft.
The objection to inner states is not that they do not exist,
but that they are not relevant in a functional analysis. We cannot
account for the behavior of any system while staying wholly
inside it; eventually we must turn to forces operating upon the
organism from without. Unless there is a weak spot in our causal
chain so that the second link is not lawfully determined by the
first, or the third by the second, then the first and third links
must be lawfully related. If we must always go back beyond
the second link for prediction and control, we may avoid many
tiresome and exhausting digressions by examining the third
link as a function of the first. Valid information about the
second link may throw light upon this relationship but can
in no way alter it.
A FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS
The external variables of which behavior is a function
provide for what may be called a causal or functional
analysis. We undertake to predict and control the behavior of
the individual organism. This is our "dependent variable"—the
effect for which we are to find the cause. Our "independent
variables"—the causes of behavior—are the external conditions
of which behavior is a function. Relations between the two—
the "cause-and-effect relationships" in behavior-are the laws
of a science. A synthesis of these laws expressed in quantitative
terms yields a comprehensive picture of the organism as a
behaving system.
This must be done within the bounds of a natural science.
We

36

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

cannot assume that behavior has any peculiar properties
which require unique methods or special kinds of
knowledge. It is often argued that an act is not so important
as the "intent" which lies behind it, or that it can be described
only in terms of what it "means" to the behaving individual or
to others whom it may affect. If statements of this sort are
useful for scientific purposes, they must be based upon
observable events, and we may confine ourselves to such
events exclusively in a functional analysis. We shall see
later that although such terms as "meaning" and "intent"
appear to refer to properties of behavior, they usually conceal
references to independent variables. This is also true of
"aggressive," "friendly," "disorganized," "intelligent," and
other terms which appear to describe properties of behavior
but in reality refer to its controlling relations.
The independent variables must also be described in physical
terms. An effort is often made to avoid the labor of analyzing
a physical situation by guessing what it "means" to an
organism or by distinguishing between the physical world
and a psychological world of "experience." This practice
also reflects a confusion between dependent and independent
variables. The events affecting an organism must be capable of
description in the language of physical science. It is sometimes
argued that certain "social forces" or the "influences" of culture
or tradition are exceptions. But we cannot appeal to entities
of this sort without explaining how they can affect both the
Scientist and the individual under observation. The physical
events which must then be appealed to in such an explanation
will supply as with alternative material suitable for a physical
analysis.
By confining ourselves to these observable events, we gain a
considerable advantage, not only in theory, but in practice.
A "social force" is no more useful in manipulating behavior
than an inner state of hunger, anxiety, or skepticism. Just as
we must trace these inner events to the manipulable variables
of which they are said to be functions before we may put
them to practical use, so we must identify the physical
events through which a "social force" is said to affect the
organism before we can manipulate it for purposes of
control. In dealing with the directly observable data we need
not refer to either the inner state or the outer force.

WHY ORGANISMS BEHAVE

37

The material to be analyzed in a science of behavior
comes from many sources:
(1) Our casual observations are not to be dismissed
entirely. They are especially important in the early stages of
investigation. Generalizations based upon them, even
without explicit analysis, supply useful hunches for further
study.
(2) In controlled field observation, as exemplified by some of
the methods of anthropology, the data are sampled more
carefully and conclusions stated more explicitly than in casual
observation. Standard instruments and practices increase the
accuracy and uniformity of field observation.
(3) Clinical observation has supplied extensive material.
Standard practices in interviewing and testing bring out behavior
which may be easily measured, summarized, and compared
with the behavior of others. Although it usually emphasizes
the disorders which bring people to clinics, the clinical sample
is often unusually interesting and of special value when the
exceptional condition points up an important feature of
behavior.
(4) Extensive observations of behavior have been made
under more rigidly controlled conditions in industrial,
military, and other institutional research. This work often
differs from field or clinical observation in its greater use of the
experimental method.
(5) Laboratory studies of human behavior provide especially
useful material. The experimental method includes the use of
instruments which improve our contact with behavior and with
the variables of which it is a function. Recording devices enable
us to observe behavior over long periods of time, and
accurate recording and measurement make effective
quantitative analysis possible. The most important feature of the
laboratory method is the deliberate manipulation of variables:
the importance of a given condition is determined by changing
it in a controlled fashion and observing the result.
Current experimental research on human behavior is
sometimes not so comprehensive as one might wish. Not all
behavioral processes are easy to set up in the laboratory, and
precision of measurement is sometimes obtained only at the
price of unreality in conditions. Those who are primarily
concerned with the everyday life of the

38

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

individual are often impatient with these artificialities, but
insofar as relevant relationships can be brought under
experimental control, the laboratory offers the best chance of
obtaining the quantitative results needed in a scientific
analysis.
(6) The extensive results of laboratory studies of the
behavior of animals below the human level are also
available. The use of this material often meets with the
objection that there is an essential gap between man and the
other animals, and that the results of one cannot be
extrapolated to the other. To insist upon this discontinuity at
the beginning of a scientific investigation is to beg the
question. Human behavior is distinguished by its complexity,
its variety, and its greater accomplishments) but the basic
processes are not therefore necessarily different. Science
advances from the simple to the complex; it is constantly
concerned with whether the processes and laws discovered at
one stage are adequate for the next. It would be rash to assert
at this point that there is no essential difference between
human behavior and the behavior of lower species; but until
an attempt has been made to deal with both in the same terms,
it would be equally rash to assert that there is. A discussion of
human embryology makes considerable use of research on the
embryos of chicks, pigs, and other animals. Treatises on
digestion, respiration, circulation, endocrine secretion, and
other physiological processes deal with rats, hamsters, rabbits,
and so on, even though the interest is primarily in human
beings. The study of behavior has much to gain from the
same practice.
We study the behavior of animals because it is simpler.
Basic processes are revealed more easily and can be recorded
over longer periods of time. Our observations are not
complicated by the social relation between subject and
experimenter. Conditions may be better controlled. We may
arrange genetic histories to control certain variables and
special life histories to control others—for example, if we
are interested in how an organism learns to see, we can raise
an animal in darkness until the experiment is begun. We are
also able to control current circumstances to an extent not
easily realized in human behavior—for example, we can vary
states of deprivation over wide ranges. These are advantages
which should not be dismissed

WHY ORGANISMS BEHAVE

39

on the a priori contention that human behavior is inevitably
set apart as a separate field.
ANALYSIS OF THE DATA
There are many ways in which data concerning human
behavior may be formulated and analyzed. The plan to be
followed in the present book may be summarized as follows:
Section n contains a classification of the variables of which
behavior is a function and a survey of the processes through
which behavior changes when any of these variables is
changed.
Section in provides a broader view of the organism as a
whole. Certain complex arrangements are considered in which
one part of the behavior of the individual alters some of the
variables of which other parts are a function. These are the
activities which we describe by saying, for example, that the
individual "controls himself," "thinks out a solution to a
problem," or "is aware of his own behavior."
Section iv analyzes the interaction of two or more
individuals in a social system. One person is often part of
the environment of another, and this relationship is usually
reciprocal. An adequate account of a given social episode
explains the behavior of all participants.
Section v analyzes various techniques through which
human behavior is controlled in government, religion,
psychotherapy, economics, and education. In each of these
fields the individual and the controlling agency constitute a
social system in the sense of Section IV.
Section vi surveys the total culture as a social environment, and
discusses the general problem of the control of human
behavior.
The plan is obviously an example of extrapolation from the
simple to the complex. No principle is used in any part of the
book which is not discussed in Section n. The basic relations
and processes of this section are derived from data obtained
under conditions which most closely approximate those of an
exact science. In Section v complex examples of human
behavior drawn from certain established fields of knowledge are
analyzed in terms of these simpler processes

40

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

and relations. The procedure is often referred to as
reductionism. If our interest is primarily in the basic
process, we turn to material of this sort as a test of the
adequacy of our analysis. If, on the other hand, our interest
is primarily in the complex case, we still have much to gain
in utilizing a formulation which has been worked out under
more favorable circumstances. For example, historical and
comparative facts about particular governments, religions,
economic systems, and so on have led to certain traditional
conceptions of the behaving individual, but each of these
conceptions has been appropriate only to the particular set
of facts from which it was derived. This restriction has
proved to be a serious handicap. The conception of man
which has emerged from the study of economic phenomena
has been of little or no value in the field of psychotherapy.
The conception of human behavior developed for use in the
field of education has had little or nothing in common with
that employed in explaining governmental or legal practices.
A basic functional analysis, however, provides us with a
common formulation of the behavior of the individual with
which we may discuss issues in all these areas and
eventually consider the effect upon the individual of the
social environment as a whole.
Certain limitations in dealing with historical and
comparative facts may be acknowledged. We are often asked
to explain more about human behavior than is asked of other
scientists in their respective fields. How can we account for
the behavior of literary or historical figures? Why could
Hamlet not kill his uncle to avenge his father's murder?
What were Robespierre's real motives? How can we explain
Leonardo's paintings? Was Hitler paranoid? Questions of
this sort have tremendous human interest. Many
psychologists, historians, biographers, and literary critics
have tried to answer them, and there is therefore a strong
presumption that they can be answered. But this may not be
so. We lack the information needed for a functional analysis.
Although we can make plausible guesses as to the variables
which operated in each case, we cannot be sure. Comparable
questions in the fields of physics, chemistry, and biology can
be answered only in the same limited way. Why did the old
Campanile in the Piazza San Marco collapse into a heap of
brick? The physicist may

WHY ORGANISMS BEHAVE

41

know how mortar was made at the time the Campanile was
built, in what atmospheric conditions it disintegrated, and
so on; yet, although he may give a plausible explanation, he
cannot with certainty account for the collapse. The
meteorologist cannot account for the flood which bore Noah's
ark to Mount Ararat, nor the biologist for the extinction of the
dodo. The specialist may give the most plausible explanation
of a historical event, but if necessary information is lacking, he
cannot give a rigorous account within the framework of a
science. The scientist is under greater pressure to answer
comparable questions about human behavior. He may feel,
or be forced to accept, the challenge of those who pretend to
give valid answers. Moreover, his answers may be of great
practical importance. The clinician, for example, may be urged
to interpret the behavior of his patient when the available
information is far from adequate, and it is often more
difficult for him than for the physicist to say that he does not
know.
The commonest objection to a thoroughgoing functional
analysis is simply that it cannot be carried out, but the only
evidence for this is that it has not yet been carried out. We
need not be discouraged by this fact. Human behavior is
perhaps the most difficult subject to which the methods of
science have ever been applied, and it is only natural that
substantial progress should be slow. It is encouraging to
reflect, however, that science seldom moves at an even pace.
Progress is sometimes arrested for a long time merely
because the particular aspect of a subject which is emphasized
proves unimportant and unproductive. A slight change in point
of attack is enough to bring rapid progress. Chemistry made
great strides when it was recognized that the weights of
combining substances, rather than their qualities or essences,
were the important things to study. The science of mechanics
moved forward rapidly when it was discovered that distances
and times were more important for certain purposes than
size, shape, color, hardness, and weight. Many different
properties or aspects of behavior have been studied for many
years with varying degrees of success. A functional analysis
which specifies behavior as a dependent variable and proposes
to account for it in terms of observable and manipulable
physical conditions is of recent advent.

42

THE POSSIBILITY OF A SCIENCE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

It has already shown itself to be a promising formulation, and
until it has been put to the test, we have no reason to prophesy
failure.
Such a plan cannot be carried out at a superficial level.
The engineer who builds a bridge successfully has more
than a casual impression of the nature of his materials, and
the time has come when we must admit that we cannot solve
the important problems in human affairs with a general
"philosophy of human behavior." The present analysis
requires considerable attention to detail. Numerical data
have been avoided, but an attempt has been made to define
each behavioral process rigorously and to exemplify each
process or relation with specific instances. If the reader is to
participate fully in the broader interpretations of the later
sections, he will have to examine these definitions and to
observe the distinctions which they make between different
processes. This may be hard work, but there is no help for it.
Human behavior is at least as difficult a subject matter as the
chemistry of organic materials or the structure of the atom.
Superficial sketches of what science has to say about any
subject are often entertaining, but they are never adequate
for effective action. If we are to further our understanding of
human behavior and to improve our practices of control, we
must be prepared for the kind of rigorous thinking which
science requires.

SECTION II

THE ANALYSIS OF
BEHAVIOR

CHAPTER

IV

REFLEXES AND CONDITIONED
REFLEXES

MAN A MACHINE
Behavior is a primary characteristic of living things.
We almost identify it with life itself. Anything which moves
is likely to be called alive—especially when the movement
has direction or acts to alter the environment. Movement
adds verisimilitude to any model of an organism. The
puppet comes to life when it moves, and idols which move
or breathe smoke are especially awe-inspiring. Robots and
other mechanical creatures entertain us just because they
move. And there is significance in the etymology of the
animated cartoon.
Machines seem alive simply because they are in motion.
The fascination of the steam shovel is legendary. Less
familiar machines may actually be frightening. We may feel
that it is only primitive people who mistake them for living
creatures today, but at one time they were unfamiliar to
everyone. When Wordsworth and Coleridge once passed a
steam engine, Wordsworth observed that it was scarcely
possible to divest oneself of the impression that it had life
and volition. "Yes," said Coleridge, "it is a giant with one
idea."
45

46

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

A mechanical toy which imitated human behavior led to

the theory of what we now call reflex action. In the first part
of the seventeenth century certain moving figures were
commonly installed in private and public gardens as sources
of amusement. They were operated hydraulically. A young
lady walking through a garden might step upon a small
concealed platform. This would open a valve, water would
flow into a piston, and a threatening figure would swing out
from the bushes to frighten her. Rene Descartes knew how
these figures worked, and he also knew how much they
seemed like living creatures. He considered the possibility
that the hydraulic system which explained the one might
also explain the other. A muscle swells when it moves a
limb—perhaps it is being inflated by a fluid coming along
the nerves from the brain. The nerves which stretch from the
surface of the body into the brain may be the strings which
open the valves.
Descartes did not assert that the human organism always
operates in this way. He favored the explanation in the case
of animals, but he reserved a sphere of action for the
"rational soul"—perhaps under religious pressure. It was not
long before the additional step was taken, however, which
produced the full-fledged doctrine of "man a machine." The
doctrine did not owe its popularity to its plausibility —there
was no reliable support for Descartes's theory—but rather to
its shocking metaphysical and theoretical implications.
Since that time two things have happened: machines have
become more lifelike, and living organisms have been found
to be more like machines. Contemporary machines are not
only more complex, they are deliberately designed to
operate in ways which resemble human behavior. "Almost
human" contrivances are a common part of our daily
experience. Doors see us coming and open to receive us.
Elevators remember our commands and stop at the correct
floor. Mechanical hands lift imperfect items off a conveyor
belt. Others write messages of fair legibility. Mechanical or
electric calculators solve equations too difficult or too timeconsuming for human mathematicians. Man has, in short,
created the machine in his own image. And as a result, the
living organism has lost some of its uniqueness. We are
much less awed by machines than our ancestors were and

REFLEXES AND CONDITIONED REFLEXES

47

less likely to endow the giant with even one idea. At the
same time, we have discovered more about how the living
organism works and are better able to see its machine-like
properties.
REFLEX ACTION
Descartes had taken an important step in suggesting that
some of the spontaneity of living creatures was only
apparent and that behavior could sometimes be traced to
action from without. The first clear-cut evidence that he had
correctly surmised the possibility of external control came
two centuries later in the discovery that the tail of a
salamander would move when part of it was touched or
pierced, even though the tail had been severed from the
body. Facts of this sort are now familiar, and we have long
since adapted our beliefs to take them into account. At the
time the discovery was made, however, it created great
excitement. It was felt to be a serious threat to prevailing
theories of the inner agents responsible for behavior. If the
movement of the amputated tail could be controlled by
external forces, was its behavior when attached to the
salamander of a different nature? If not, what about the
inner causes which had hitherto been used to account for it?
It was seriously suggested as an answer that the "will" must
be coexistent with the body and that some part of it must
invest any amputated part. But the fact remained that an
external event had been identified which could be
substituted, as in Descartes's daring hypothesis, for the inner
explanation.
The external agent came to be called a stimulus. The
behavior controlled by it came to be called a response.
Together they comprised what was called a reflex—on the
theory that the disturbance caused by the stimulus passed to
the central nervous system and was "reflected" back to the
muscles. It was soon found that similar external causes
could be demonstrated in the behavior of larger portions of
the organism—for example, in the body of a frog, cat, or
dog in which the spinal cord had been severed at the neck.
Reflexes including parts of the brain were soon added, and it
is now common knowledge that in the intact organism many
kinds of stimulation lead to almost inevitable reactions of
the same reflex nature. Many

48

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

characteristics of the relation have been studied
quantitatively. The time which elapses between stimulus
and response (the "latency") has been measured precisely.
The magnitude of the response has been studied as a
function of the intensity of the stimulus. Other conditions of
the organism have been found to be important in completing
the account—for example, a reflex may be "fatigued" by
repeated rapid elicitation.
The reflex was at first closely identified with hypothetical
neural events in the so-called "reflex arc." A surgical division
of the organism was a necessary entering wedge, for it
provided a simple and dramatic method of analyzing
behavior. But surgical analysis became unnecessary as soon
as the principle of the stimulus was understood and as soon
as techniques were discovered for handling complex
arrangements of variables in other ways. By eliminating
some conditions, holding others constant, and varying others
in an orderly manner, basic lawful relations could be
established without dissection and could be expressed
without neurological theories.
The extension of the principle of the reflex to include
behavior involving more and more of the organism was
made only in the face of vigorous opposition. The reflex
nature of the spinal animal was challenged by proponents of
a "spinal will." The evidence they offered in support of a
residual inner cause consisted of behavior which apparently
could not be explained wholly in terms of stimuli. When
higher parts of the nervous system were added, and when
the principle was eventually extended to the intact organism,
the same pattern of resistance was followed. But arguments
for spontaneity, and for the explanatory entities which
spontaneity seems to demand, are of such form that they
must retreat before the accumulating facts. Spontaneity is
negative evidence; it points to the weakness of a current
scientific explanation, but does not in itself prove an
alternative version. By its very nature, spontaneity must
yield ground as a scientific analysis is able to advance. As
more and more of the behavior of the organism has come to
be explained in terms of stimuli, the territory held by inner
explanations has been reduced. The "will" has retreated up
the spinal cord, through the lower and then the higher parts
of the brain, and finally, with the conditioned reflex, has

REFLEXES AND CONDITIONED REFLEXES

49

escaped through the front of the head. At each stage, some
part of the control of the organism has passed from a
hypothetical inner entity to the external environment.
THE RANGE OF REFLEX ACTION
A certain part of behavior, then, is elicited by stimuli, and
our prediction of that behavior is especially precise. When
we flash a light in the eye of a normal subject, the pupil
contracts. When he sips lemon juice, saliva is secreted. When
we raise the temperature of the room to a certain point, the
small blood vessels in his skin enlarge, blood is brought
nearer to the skin, and he "turns red." We use these relations for
many practical purposes. When it is necessary to induce
vomiting, we employ a suitable stimulus—an irritating fluid
or a finger in the throat. The actress who must cry real tears
resorts to onion juice on her handkerchief.
As these examples suggest, many reflex responses are
executed by the "smooth muscles" (for example, the muscles in
the walls of the blood vessels) and the glands. These structures
are particularly concerned with the internal economy of the
organism. They are most likely to be of interest in a science
of behavior in the emotional reflexes to be discussed in
Chapter X. Other reflexes use the "striped muscles" which move
the skeletal frame of the organism. The "knee jerk" and other
reflexes which the physician uses for diagnostic purposes are
examples. We maintain our posture, either when standing still
or moving about, with the aid of a complex network of such
reflexes.
In spite of the importance suggested by these examples, it is
still true that if we were to assemble all the behavior which falls
into the pattern of the simple reflex, we should have only a very
small fraction of the total behavior of the organism. This is not
what early investigators in the field expected. We now see
that the principle of the reflex was overworked. The
exhilarating discovery of the stimulus led to exaggerated claims.
It is neither plausible nor expedient to conceive of the
organism as a complicated jack-in-the-box with a long list of
tricks, each of which may be evoked by pressing the proper
button. The greater part of the behavior of the intact organism is
not

50

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

under this primitive sort of stimulus control. The
environment affects the organism in many ways which are
not conveniently classed as "stimuli," and even in the field
of stimulation only a small part of the forces acting upon the
organism elicit responses in the invariable manner of reflex
action. To ignore the principle of the reflex entirely,
however, would be equally unwarranted.
CONDITIONED REFLEXES
The reflex became a more important instrument of
analysis when it was shown that novel relations between
stimuli and responses could be established during the
lifetime of the individual by a process first studied by the
Russian physiologist, I. P. Pavlov. H. G. Wells once
compared Pavlov with another of his distinguished
contemporaries, George Bernard Shaw. He considered the
relative importance to society of the quiet laboratory worker
and the skillful propagandist and expressed his opinion by
describing a hypothetical situation: if these two men were
drowning and only one life preserver were available, he
would throw it to Pavlov.
Evidently Shaw was not pleased, and, after what appears
to have been a hasty glance at Pavlov's work, retaliated. His
book, The Adventures of the Black Girl in Her Search for
God, describes a girl's experiences in a jungle of ideas. The
jungle is inhabited by many prophets, some of them ancient
and some as modern as an "elderly myop" who bears a close
resemblance to Pavlov. The black girl encounters Pavlov
just after she has been frightened by a fearful roar from the
prophet Micah. She pulls herself up in her flight and
exclaims:
"What am I running away from? I'm not afraid of that dear
noisy old man."
"Your fears and hopes are only fancies" said a voice close to her,
proceeding from a very shortsighted elderly man in spectacles who
was sitting on a gnarled log. "In running away you were acting on
a conditioned reflex. It is quite simple. Having lived among lions
you have from your childhood associated the sound of a roar with
deadly danger. Hence your precipitate flight when that
superstitious old jackass brayed at you. This remarkable discovery
cost me twenty-five years of devoted research, during which I cut
out the brains of innumerable dogs, and observed their

REFLEXES AND CONDITIONED REFLEXES

51

spittle by making holes in their cheeks for them to salivate
through instead of through their tongues. The whole scientific
world is prostrate at my feet in admiration of this colossal
achievement and gratitude for the light it has shed on the great
problems of human conduct."
"Why didn't you ask me?" said the black girl. "I could have told
you in twenty-five seconds without hurting those poor dogs."
"Your ignorance and presumption are unspeakable" said the old
myop. "The fact was known of course to every child; but it had
never been proved experimentally in the laboratory; and therefore
it was not scientifically known at all. It reached me as an unskilled
conjecture: I handed it on as science. Have you ever performed an
experiment, may I ask?"
"Several" said the black girl. "I will perform one now. Do you
know what you are sitting on?"
"I am sitting on a log grey with age, and covered with an
uncomfortable rugged bark" said the myop.
"You are mistaken" said the black girl. "You are sitting on a
sleeping crocodile."
With a yell which Micah himself might have envied, the myop
rose and fled frantically to a neighboring tree, up which he
climbed catlike with an agility which in so elderly a gentleman was
quite superhuman.
"Come down" said the black girl. "You ought to know that
crocodiles are only to be found near rivers. I was only trying an
experiment. Come down."

But the elderly myop is unable to come down and begs the
girl to perform another experiment.
"I will" said the black girl. "There is a tree snake smelling at the
back of your neck." The myop was on the ground in a jiffy.1

It is clear that Shaw has caught the spirit of a science of
behavior. The black girl is undeniably a good behavioral
engineer. In two very neat examples of stimulus control she
induces clearcut responses in the elderly myop. (His behavior
does not, as we shall see later, exero plify the simple reflex,
conditioned or otherwise.) But if the authoi is fully aware of
the potentialities of the practical control of behavior, he is
not so strong on theory, for the passage exemplifies a
common misunderstanding regarding the achievement of
science.
1 George Bernard Shaw, The Adventures of the Black Girl in Her
Search for God, copyright, 1933, by George Bernard Shaw, and used by
permission of the Public Trustee and the Society of Authors.

52

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

The facts of science are seldom entirely unknown "to every
child." A child who can catch a ball knows a good deal
about trajectories. It may take science a long time to
calculate the position of a ball at a given moment any more
exactly than the child must "calculate" it in order to catch it.
When Count Rumford, while boring cannon in the military
arsenal in Munich, demonstrated that he could produce any
desired amount of heat without combustion, he changed the
course of scientific thinking about the causes of heat; but he
had discovered nothing which was not already known to the
savage who kindles a fire with a spinning stick or the man
who warms his hands on a frosty morning by rubbing them
together vigorously.
The difference between an unskilled conjecture and a
scientific fact is not simply a difference in evidence. It had
long been known that a child might cry before it was hurt or
that a fox might salivate upon seeing a bunch of grapes.
What Pavlov added can be understood most clearly by
considering his history. Originally he was interested in the
process of digestion, and he studied the conditions under
which digestive juices were secreted. Various chemical
substances in the mouth or in the stomach resulted in the
reflex action of the digestive glands. Pavlov's work was
sufficiently outstanding to receive the Nobel Prize, but it was
by no means complete. He was handicapped by a certain
unexplained secretion. Although food in the mouth might
elicit a flow of saliva, saliva often flowed abundantly when
the mouth was empty. We should not be surprised to learn
that this was called "psychic secretion." It was explained in
terms which "any child could understand." Perhaps the dog
was "thinking about food." Perhaps the sight of the
experimenter preparing for the next experiment "reminded"
the dog of the food it had received in earlier experiments.
But these explanations did nothing to bring the
unpredictable salivation within the compass of a rigorous
account of digestion.
Pavlov's first step was to control conditions so that
"psychic secretion" largely disappeared. He designed a room
in which contact between dog and experimenter was
reduced to a minimum. The room was made as free as
possible from incidental stimuli. The dog could not hear the
sound of footsteps in neighboring rooms or smell

REFLEXES AND CONDITIONED REFLEXES

53

accidental odors in the ventilating system. Pavlov then built
up a "psychic secretion" step by step. In place of the
complicated stimulus of an experimenter preparing a
syringe or filling a dish with food, he introduced
controllable stimuli which could be easily described in
physical terms. In place of the accidental occasions upon
which stimulation might precede or accompany food, Pavlov
arranged precise schedules in which controllable stimuli and
food were presented in certain orders. Without influencing
the dog in any other way, he could sound a tone and insert
food into the dog's mouth. In this way he was able to show
that the tone acquired its ability to elicit secretion, and he
was also able to follow the process through which this came
about. Once in possession of these facts, he could then give
a satisfactory account of all secretion. He had replaced the
"psyche" of psychic secretion with certain objective facts in
the recent history of the organism.
The process of conditioning, as Pavlov reported it in his
book Conditioned Reflexes, is a process of stimulus
substitution. A previously neutral stimulus acquires the power
to elicit a response which was originally elicited by another
stimulus. The change occurs when the neutral stimulus is
followed or "reinforced" by the effective stimulus. Pavlov
studied the effect of the interval of time elapsing between
stimulus and reinforcement. He investigated the extent to
which various properties of stimuli could acquire control.
He also studied the converse process, in which the
conditioned stimulus loses its power to evoke the response
when it is no longer reinforced —a process which he called
"extinction."
The quantitative properties which he discovered are by no
means "known to every child." And they are important. The
most efficient use of conditioned reflexes in the practical
control of behavior often requires quantitative information.
A satisfactory theory makes the same demands. In
dispossessing explanatory fictions, for example, we cannot be
sure that an event of the sort implied by "psychic secretion"
is not occasionally responsible until we can predict the exact
amount of secretion at any given time. Only a quantitative
description will make sure that there is no additional mental
process in which the dog "associates the sound of the tone
with the idea of

54

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

food" or in which it salivates because it "expects" food to
appear. Pavlov could dispense with concepts of this sort
only when he could give a complete quantitative account of
salivation in terms of the stimulus, the response, and the
history of conditioning.
Pavlov, as a physiologist, was interested in how the
stimulus was converted into neural processes and in how
other processes carried the effect through the nervous system
to the muscles and glands. The subtitle of his book is An
Investigation of the Physiological Activity of the Cerebral
Cortex. The "physiological activity" was inferential. We
may suppose, however, that comparable processes will
eventually be described in terms appropriate to neural
events. Such a description will fill in the temporal and
spatial gaps between an earlier history of conditioning and
its current result. The additional account will be important
in the integration of scientific knowledge but will not make
the relation between stimulus and response any more lawful
or any more useful in prediction and control. Pavlov's
achievement was the discovery, not of neural processes, but
of important quantitative relations which permit us,
regardless of neurological hypotheses, to give a direct
account of behavior in the field of the conditioned reflex.
THE "SURVIVAL VALUE" OF REFLEXES
Reflexes are intimately concerned with the well-being of
the organism. The process of digestion could not go on if
certain secretions did not begin to flow when certain types
of food entered the stomach. Reflex behavior which involves
the external environment is important in the same way. If a
dog's foot is injured when it steps on a sharp object, it is
important that the leg should be flexed rapidly so that the
foot is withdrawn. The so-called "flexion reflex" brings this
about. Similarly, it is important that dust blown into the eye
should be washed out by a profuse secretion of tears, that an
object suddenly moved toward the eyes should be warded
off by blinking^ and so on. Such biological advantages
"explain" reflexes in an evolutionary sense: individuals who
are most likely to behave in these ways are presumably most
likely to survive and to pass on the adaptive characteristic to
their offspring.

REFLEXES AND CONDITIONED REFLEXES

55

The process of conditioning also has survival value. Since
the environment changes from generation to generation,
particularly the external rather than the internal
environment, appropriate reflex responses cannot always
develop as inherited mechanisms. Thus an organism may be
prepared to secrete saliva when certain chemical substances
stimulate its mouth, but it cannot gain the added advantage
of salivating before food is actually tasted unless the
physical appearance of foodstuffs remains the same from
environment to environment and from time to time. Since
nature cannot foresee, so to speak, that an object with a
particular appearance will be edible, the evolutionary
process can only provide a mechanism by which the
individual will acquire responses to particular features of a
given environment after they have been encountered. Where
inherited behaviour leaves off, the inherited modifiability of
the process of conditioning takes over.
It does not follow that every conditioned reflex has
survival value. The mechanism may go wrong. Certain pairs
of stimuli, such as the appearance and taste of food, may
occur together in a consistent way which is important to the
organism throughout its life, but we have no guarantee that
conditioning will not occur when the pairing of stimuli is
temporary or accidental. Many "superstitions" exemplify
conditioned responses arising from accidental contingencies.
The behavior is due to an actual pairing of stimuli, but the
resulting conditioned reflex is not useful. We call some such
reflexes "irrational." A child who has been attacked by a dog
may fear all dogs. The visual stimulus supplied by a dog has
been paired with the terrifying stimulation of physical
attack. But the pairing is not inevitable for all dogs. When
the response is later elicited at the sight of a harmless dog, it
serves no useful function. It is, nevertheless, due to a
process which does prove valuable elsewhere. We all suffer
from this miscarriage of the evolutionary process when we
make stereotyped responses. Strong behavior appropriate to
the sight of someone we dislike violently may be evoked by
other people with the same features, wearing the same type
of clothes, and so on. Minor effects of the same sort are less
troublesome. A nostalgic reaction to a tune which was
popular during an old love affair is a conditioned response

56

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

arising from a nonfunctional pairing of stimuli, but we do
not call it superstitious or irrational.
THE RANGE OF CONDITIONED REFLEXES
Although the process of conditioning greatly extends the
scope of the eliciting stimulus, it does not bring all the
behavior of the organism within such stimulus control.
According to the formula of stimulus substitution we must
elicit a response before we can condition it. All conditioned
reflexes are, therefore, based upon unconditioned reflexes.
But we have seen that reflex responses are only a small part of
the total behavior of the organism. Conditioning adds new
controlling stimuli, but not new responses. In using the
principle, therefore, we are not subscribing to a
"conditioned-reflex theory" of all behavior.
A fair measure of the range of the conditioned reflex is its
use in the practical control of behavior. Reflexes which are
concerned with the internal economy of the organism are
seldom of practical importance to other people, but an
occasion may arise when we are interested in making
someone blush or laugh or cry, and we then resort to
conditioned or unconditioned stimuli. It is frequently the
business of literature to generate behavior in this way. The
"tear-jerker" has a literal meaning. More subtle effects are
similar: it is important in understanding the effect of a poem
to note that conditioned responses may be elicited by such
verbal stimuli as "death," "love," "sorrow," and so on, quite
apart from the effect of the prose meaning of the poem. The
emotional effects of music and painting are largely
conditioned.
We also use this process to arrange for the control of
behavior at a later date. In patriotic and religious education,
for example, emotional responses to flags, insignia, symbols,
and rituals are conditioned so that these stimuli will be
effective upon future occasions. A commonly proposed
"cure" for excessive drinking or smoking consists of adding
substances to liquor or tobacco which generate nausea,
headaches, and so on. When liquor or tobacco are later seen
or tasted, similar responses are evoked as the result of
conditioning. They may compete with the behavior of
drinking or smoking—as by "taking all the fun out of it."
Conditioning of this sort is treating a symptom

REFLEXES AND CONDITIONED REFLEXES

57

rather than a cause, but it may make it easier for the patient to
stop drinking or smoking for other reasons.
Training a soldier consists in part of conditioning
emotional responses. If pictures of the enemy, the enemy's
flag, and so on are paired with stories 5r pictures of atrocities, a
suitable aggressive reaction will probably occur at the sight of
the enemy. Favorable reactions are generated in somewhat the
same way. Responses to delectable foods are easily
transferred to other objects. Just as we "dislike" the liquor or
tobacco which makes us ill, so we "like" stimuli which
accompany delicious food. The successful salesman is likely
to buy his customer a drink or take him out to dinner. The
salesman is not interested in gastric reactions but in the
customer's predisposition to act favorably toward him and
his product which, as we shall see later, also follows from
the pairing of stimuli. The free lunch at a political rally has a
similar effect. So has the stick of gum which the pediatrician
gives his young patient. It has been shown experimentally that
people come to "like" modern music if they listen to it while
eating. When the Jewish child first learns to read, he kisses a
page upon which a drop of honey has been placed. The
important thing is not that he will later salivate at the sight of
a book, but that he will exhibit a predisposition "in favor of"
books. The reinforcements which establish predispositions
of this sort are not all gastric. As advertisers well know, the
responses and attitudes evoked by pretty girls, babies, and
pleasant scenes may be transferred to trade names, products,
pictures of products, and so on.
We are sometimes interested in generating one emotional
response in order to counteract or balance another. The
dentisk for example, faces a practical problem in that he must
administer painful stimuli. These stand in such relation to the
stimuli supplied by the waiting room, the dental chair, the
instruments, and the sound of the drill that eventually the
latter evoke a variety of emotional reactions. Some of these
we characterize roughly as anxiety. A funny picture-book in
the waiting room may elicit responses which are incompatible
with anxiety and which to some extent cancel it. This
momentary effect exemplifies the use of stimuli which have
already been conditioned. The "educational" effect of such a
book in creating a less unfavorable attitude toward the dentist
exemplifies the use of condi-

58

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

tioning in the control of behavior. The flowers and music in
"funeral homes" have an immediate effect in counteracting
the reactions evoked by a dead body, and through the process
of conditioning they create a more favorable predisposition
in the future toward burial practices.
Eliminating a conditioned response is also a common
practical problem. For example, we may want to reduce the
fear reactions which have come to be evoked by people,
animals, air raids, or military combat. Following the
procedures in the conditioned-reflex experiment, we present
a conditioned stimulus while omitting the reinforcing
stimulus responsible for its effect. A major step in the
treatment of stuttering, for example, is to extinguish
reactions of anxiety or embarrassment generated by
thoughtless persons who have laughed at the stutterer or
grown impatient with him. A common technique is to
encourage him to talk to anyone he encounters. Functional
responses of anxiety and embarrassment are generally
conditioned in early childhood. If the adult stutterer is no
longer laughed at, the responses may undergo extinction.
The therapy consists simply of encouraging the stutterer to
talk so that the conditioned stimuli thus automatically
generated may occur without reinforcement.
If the conditioned stimulus elicits too strong a response, it
may be necessary to present it in graded doses. If a child
who has been frightened by a dog is given a small puppy,
the similarity between the puppy and the frightening dog is
not great enough to elicit a strong conditioned fear response.
Any slight response which happens to appear undergoes
extinction. As the puppy grows to resemble the dog,
extinction proceeds by easy stages. A similar technique is
sometimes used in reducing excessive emotional reactions to
air raids, combat, and similar traumatic conditions.
Extinction is brought about with stimuli which are at first
only slightly disturbing—vague noises, faint sirens, or distant
sounds of bursting shells. Visual stimuli are presented without
their auditory accompaniments in silent moving pictures of
actual combat. As extinction occurs, the verisimilitude is
increased. Eventually, if the treatment is successful, little or
no response is elicited by a full-scale stimulus.

CHAPTER V

OPERANT BEHAVIOR
THE CONSEQUENCES OF BEHAVIOR
Reflexes, conditioned or otherwise, are mainly
concerned with the internal physiology of the organism. We
are most often interested, however, in behavior which has
some effect upon the surrounding world. Such behavior raises
most of the practical problems in human affairs and is also of
particular theoretical interest because of its special
characteristics. The consequences of behavior may "feed
back" into the organism. When they do so, they may change
the probability that the behavior which produced them will
occur again. The English language contains many words,
such as "reward" and "punishment," which refer to this
effect, but we can get a clear picture of it only through
experimental analysis.
LEARNING CURVES
One of the first serious attempts to study the changes
brought about by the consequences of behavior was made by
E. L. Thorn-dike in 1898. His experiments arose from a
controversy which was then of considerable interest. Darwin,
in insisting upon the continuity of species, had questioned
the belief that man was unique among the animals in his
ability to think. Anecdotes in which lower
59

60

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

animals seemed to show the "power of reasoning" were
published in great numbers. But when terms which had
formerly been applied only to human behavior were thus
extended, certain questions arose concerning their meaning.
Did the observed facts point to mental processes, or could
these apparent evidences of thinking be explained in other
ways? Eventually it became clear that the assumption of
inner thought-processes was not required. Many years were
to pass before the same question was seriously raised
concerning human behavior, but Thorndike's experiments
and his alternative explanation of reasoning in animals were
important steps in that direction.
If a cat is placed in a box from which it can escape only by
unlatch ing a door, it will exhibit many different kinds of
behavior, some of which may be effective in opening the
door. Thorndike found that when a cat was put into such a
box again and again, the behavior which led to escape
tended to occur sooner and sooner until eventually escape
was as simple and quick as possible. The cat had solved its
problem as well as if it were a "reasoning" human being,
though perhaps not so speedily. Yet Thorndike observed no
"thought-process" and argued that none was needed by way
of explanation. He could describe his results simply by
saying that a part of the cat's behavior was "stamped in"
because it was followed by the opening of the door.
The fact that behavior is stamped in when followed by
certain consequences, Thorndike called "The Law of
Effect." What he had observed was that certain behavior
occurred more and more readily in comparison with other
behavior characteristic of the same situation. By noting the
successive delays in getting out of the box and plotting them
on a graph, he constructed a "learning curve." This early
attempt to show a quantitative process in behavior, similar
to the processes of physics and biology, was heralded as an
important advance. It revealed a process which took place
over a considerable period of time and which was not
obvious to casual inspection. Thorndike, in short, had made
a discovery. Many similar curves have since been recorded
and have become the substance of chapters on learning in
psychology texts.
Learning curves do not, however, describe the basic
process of

OPERANT BEHAVIOR

61

stamping in. Thorndike's measure—the time taken to escape
— involved the elimination of other behavior, and his curve
depended upon the number of different things a cat might
do in a particular box. It also depended upon the behavior
which the experimenter or the apparatus happened to select
as "successful" and upon whether this was common or rare in
comparison with other behavior evoked in the box. A learning
curve obtained in this way might be said to reflect the
properties of the latch box rather than of the behavior of the
cat. The same is true of many other devices developed for
the study of learning. The various mazes through which
white rats and other animals learn to run, the "choice boxes"
in which animals learn to discriminate between properties or
patterns of stimuli, the apparatuses which present sequences
of material to be learned in the study of human memory—
each of these yields its own type of learning curve.
By averaging many individual cases, we may make these
curves as smooth as we like. Moreover, curves obtained under
many different circumstances may agree in showing certain
general properties. For example, when measured in this way,
learning is generally "negatively accelerated"—improvement in
performance occurs more and more slowly as the condition is
approached in which further improvement is impossible. But
it does not follow that negative acceleration is characteristic
of the basic process. Suppose, by analogy, we fill a glass jar with
gravel which has been so well mixed that pieces of any given
size are evenly distributed. We then agitate the jar gently and
watch the pieces rearrange themselves. The larger move
toward the top, the smaller toward the bottom. This process, too,
is negatively accelerated. At first the mixture separates rapidly,
but as separation proceeds, the condition in which there will
be no further change is approached more and more slowly.
Such a curve may be quite smooth and reproducible, but this
fact alone is not of any great significance. The curve is the
result of certain fundamental processes involving the contact
of spheres of different sizes, the resolution of the forces
resulting from agitation, and so on, but it is by no means the
most direct record of these processes.
Learning curves show how the various kinds of behavior
evoked

62 THE ANALYSIS OF

BEHAVIOR

in complex situations are sorted out, emphasized, and
reordered. The basic process of the stamping in of a single
act brings this change about, but it is not reported directly
by the change itself.
OPERANT CONDITIONING
To get at the core of Thorndike's Law of Effect, we need
to clarify the notion of "probability of response." This is an
extremely important concept; unfortunately, it is also a
difficult one. In discussing human behavior, we often refer to
"tendencies" or "predispositions" to behave in particular
ways. Almost every theory of behavior uses some such term
as "excitatory potential," "habit strength," or "determining
tendency." But how do we observe a tendency? And how
can we measure one?
If a given sample of behavior existed in only two states, in
one of which it always occurred and in the other never, we
should be almost helpless in following a program of
functional analysis. An all-or-none subject matter lends
itself only to primitive forms of description. It is a great
advantage to suppose instead that the probability that a
response will occur ranges continuously between these allor-none extremes. We can then deal with variables which,
unlike the eliciting stimulus, do not "cause a given bit of
behavior to occur" but simply make the occurrence more
probable. We may then proceed to deal, for example, with
the combined effect of more than one such variable.
The everyday expressions which carry the notion of
probability, tendency, or predisposition describe the
frequencies with which bits of behavior occur. We never
observe a probability as such. We say that someone is
"enthusiastic" about bridge when we observe that he plays
bridge often and talks about it often. To be "greatly
interested" in music is to play, listen to, and talk about music
a good deal. The "inveterate" gambler is one who gambles
frequently. The camera "fan" is to be found taking pictures,
developing them, and looking at pictures made by himself
and others. The "highly sexed" person frequently engages in
sexual behavior. The "dipsomaniac" drinks frequently.
In characterizing a man's behavior in terms of frequency,
we

OPERANT BEHAVIOR

63

assume certain standard conditions: he must be able to
execute and repeat a given act, and other behavior must not
interfere appreciably. We cannot be sure of the extent of a
man's interest in music, for example, if he is necessarily
busy with other things. When we come to refine the notion
of probability of response for scientific use, we find that
here, too, our data are frequencies and that the conditions
under which they are observed must be specified. The main
technical problem in designing a controlled experiment is to
provide for the observation and interpretation of
frequencies. We eliminate, or at least hold constant, any
condition which encourages behavior which competes with
the behavior we are to study. An organism is placed in a
quiet box where its behavior may be observed through a oneway screen or recorded mechanically. This is by no means
an environmental vacuum, for the organism will react to the
features of the box in many ways; but its behavior will
eventually reach a fairly stable level, against which the
frequency of a selected response may be investigated.
To study the process which Thorndike called stamping in,
we must have a "consequence." Giving food to a hungry
organism will do. We can feed our subject conveniently
with a small food tray which is operated electrically. When
the tray is first opened, the organism will probably react to
it in ways which interfere with the process we plan to
observe. Eventually, after being fed from the tray repeatedly,
it eats readily, and we are then ready to make this
consequence contingent upon behavior and to observe the
result.
We select a relatively simple bit of behavior which may be
freely and rapidly repeated, and which is easily observed
and recorded. If our experimental subject is a pigeon, for
example, the behavior of raising the head above a given
height is convenient. This may be observed by sighting
across the pigeon's head at a scale pinned on the far wall of
the box. We first study the height at which the head is
normally held and select some line on the scale which is
reached only infrequently. Keeping our eye on the scale we
then begin to open the food tray very quickly whenever the
head rises above the line. If the experiment is conducted
according to specifications, the result is invariable: we
observe an immediate change in the frequency

64 THE ANALYSIS OF

BEHAVIOR

with which the head crosses the line. We also observe, and
this is of some importance theoretically, that higher lines are
now being crossed. We may advance almost immediately to
a higher line in determining when food is to be presented. In
a minute or two, the bird's posture has changed so that the
top of the head seldom falls below the line which we first
chose.
When we demonstrate the process of stamping in in this
relatively simple way, we see that certain common
interpretations of Thorn-dike's experiment are superfluous.
The expression "trial-and-error learning," which is frequently
associated with the Law of Effect, is clearly out of place
here. We are reading something into our observations when
we call any upward movement of the head a "trial," and
there is no reason to call any movement which does not
achieve a specified consequence an "error." Even the term
"learning" is misleading. The statement that the bird "learns
that it will get food by stretching its neck" is an inaccurate
report of what has happened. To say that it has acquired the
"habit" of stretching its neck is merely to resort to an
explanatory fiction, since our only evidence of the habit is
the acquired tendency to perform the act. The barest pos
sible statement of the process is this: we make a given
consequence contingent upon certain physical properties of
behavior (the upward movement of the head), and the
behavior is then observed to increase in frequency.
It is customary to refer to any movement of the organism
as a "response." The word is borrowed from the field of
reflex action and implies an act which, so to speak, answers a
prior event—the stimulus. But we may make an event
contingent upon behavior without identifying, or being able
to identify, a prior stimulus. We did not alter the
environment of the pigeon to elicit the upward movement of
the head. It is probably impossible to show that any single
stimulus invariably precedes this movement. Behavior of
this sort may come under the control of stimuli, but the
relation is not that of elicitation. The term "response" is
therefore not wholly appropriate but is so well established
that we shall use it in the following discussion.
A response which has already occurred cannot, of course,
be predicted or controlled. We can only predict that similar
responses will

OPERANT BEHAVIOR

65

occur in the future. The unit of a predictive science is, therefore,
not a response but a class of responses. The word "operant" will
be used to describe this class. The term emphasizes the fact that
the behavior operates upon the environment to generate
consequences. The con-[ sequences define the properties with
respect to which responses are called similar. The term will be
used both as an adjective (operant behavior) and as a noun to
designate the behavior defined by a given consequence.
A single instance in which a pigeon raises its head is a
response. It is a bit of history which may be reported in any
frame of reference we wish to use. The behavior called
"raising the head," regardless of when specific instances
occur, is an operant. It can be described, not as an
accomplished act, but rather as a set of acts defined by the
property of the height to which the head is raised. In this
sense an operant is defined by an effect which may be
specified in physical terms; the "cutoff" at a certain height is
a property of behavior.
The term "learning" may profitably be saved in its
traditional sense to describe the reassortment of responses in
a complex situation. Terms for the process of stamping in
may be borrowed from Pavlov's analysis of the conditioned
reflex. Pavlov himself called all events which strengthened
behavior "reinforcement" and all the resulting changes
"conditioning." In the Pavlovian experiment, however, a
reinforcer is paired with a stimulus; whereas in operant
behavior it is contingent upon a response. Operant
reinforcement is therefore a separate process and requires a
separate analysis. In both cases, the strengthening of behavior
which results from reinforcement is appropriately called
"conditioning." In operant conditioning we "strengthen" an
operant in the sense of making g. response more probable
or, in actual fact, more frequent. In Pavlovian or
"respondent" conditioning we simply increase the
magnitude of the response elicited by the conditioned
stimulus and shorten the time which elapses between stimulus
and response. (We note, incidentally, that these two cases
exhaust the possibilities: an organism is conditioned when a
reinforcer [1] accompanies another stimulus or [2] follows
upon the organism's own behavior. Any event which does
neither has no effect in changing a probability of response.)
In the

66

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

pigeon experiment, then, food is the reinforcer and
presenting food when a response is emitted is the
reinforcement. The operant is defined by the property upon
which reinforcement is contingent— the height to which the
head must be raised. The change in frequency with which
the head is lifted to this height is the process of operant
conditioning.
While we are awake, we act upon the environment
constantly, and many of the consequences of our actions are
reinforcing. Through operant conditioning the environment
builds the basic repertoire with which we keep our balance,
walk, play games, handle instruments and tools, talk, write,
sail a boat, drive a car, or fly a plane. A change in the
environment—a new car, a new friend, a new field of
interest, a new job, a new location—may find us unprepared,
but our behavior usually adjusts quickly as we acquire new
responses and discard old. We shall see in the following
chapter that operant reinforcement does more than build a
behavioral repertoire. It improves the efficiency of behavior
and maintains behavior in strength long after acquisition or
efficiency has ceased to be of interest.
QUANTITATIVE PROPERTIES
It is not easy to obtain a curve for operant conditioning.
We cannot isolate an operant completely, nor can we
eliminate all arbitrary details. In our example we might plot
a curve showing how the frequency with which the pigeon's
head is lifted to a given height changes with time or the
number of reinforcements, but the total effect is clearly
broader than this. There is a shift in a larger pattern of
behavior, and to describe it fully we should have to follow
all movements of the head. Even so, our account would not
be complete. The height to which the head was to be lifted
was chosen arbitrarily, and the effect of reinforcement
depends upon this selection. If we reinforce a height which is
seldom reached, the change in pattern will be far greater than
if we had chosen a commoner height. For an adequate
account we need a set of curves covering all the possibilities.
Still another arbitrary element appears if we force the head
to a higher and higher position, since we may follow
different schedules in advancing the line selected for
reinforcement. Each schedule will

OPERANT BEHAVIOR

67

yield its own curve, and the picture would be complete only
if it icovered all possible schedules.
We cannot avoid these problems by selecting a response which
is I more sharply defined by features of the environment—for
example, (the behavior of operating a door latch. Some
mechanical indicator I of behavior is, of course, an advantage
—for example, in helping us I to reinforce consistently. We
could record the height of a pigeon's I head with a photocell
arrangement, but it is simpler to select a I response which
makes a more easily recorded change in the environ-i ment If the
bird is conditioned to peck a small disk on the wall of \ the
experimental box, we may use the movement of the disk to close
I an electric circuit—both to operate the food tray and to
count or \ record responses. Such a response seems to be
different from stretch-[ ing the neck in that it has an all-or-none
character. But we shall see in a moment that the mechanical
features of striking a key do not ; define a "response" which is
any less arbitrary than neck-stretching. An experimental
arrangement need not be perfect in order to provide important
quantitative data in operant conditioning. We are already in a
position to evaluate many factors. The importance of feedback is clear. The organism must be stimulated by the
consequences of its behavior if conditioning is to take place.
In learning to wiggle one's ears, for example, it is necessary to
know when the ears move if responses which produce
movement are to be strengthened in comparison with responses
which do not. In re-educating the patient in the use of a
partially paralyzed limb, it may be of help to amplify the feedback from slight movements, either with instruments or through
the report of an instructor. The deaf-mute learns to talk only
when he receives a feed-back from his own behavior which
can be compared with the stimulation he receives from other
speakers. One function of the educator is to supply arbitrary
(sometimes spurious) consequences for the sake of feed-back.
Conditioning depends also upon the kind, amount, and
immediacy of reinforcement, as well as many other factors.
A single reinforcement may have a considerable effect. Under
good conditions the frequency of a response shifts from a
prevailing low value to a stable high value in a single abrupt
step. More commonly

68

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

we observe a substantial increase as the result of a single
reinforcement, and additional increases from later
reinforcements. The observation is not incompatible with the
assumption of an instantaneous change to a maximal
probability, since we have by no means isolated a single
operant. The increased frequency must be interpreted with
respect to other behavior characteristic of the situation. The
fact that conditioning can be so rapid in an organism as
"low" as the rat or pigeon has interesting implications.
Differences in what is commonly called intelligence are
attributed in part to differences in speed of learning. But
there can be no faster learning than an instantaneous
increase in probability of response. The superiority of
human behavior is, therefore, of some other sort.
THE CONTROL OF OPERANT BEHAVIOR
The experimental procedure in operant conditioning is
straightforward. We arrange a contingency of reinforcement
and expose an organism to it for a given period. We then
explain the frequent emission of the response by pointing to
this history. But what improvement has been made in the
prediction and control of the behavior in the future? What
variables enable us to predict whether or not the organism
will respond? What variables must we now control in order
to induce it to respond?
We have been experimenting with a hungry pigeon. As we
shall see in Chapter IX, this means a pigeon which has been
deprived of food for a certain length of time or until its
usual body-weight has been slightly reduced. Contrary to
what one might expect, experimental studies have shown
that the magnitude of the reinforcing effect of food may not
depend upon the degree of such deprivation. But the
frequency of response which results from reinforcement
depends upon the degree of deprivation at the time the
response is observed. Even though we have conditioned a
pigeon to stretch its neck, it does not do this if it is not
hungry. We have, therefore, a new sort of control over its
behavior: in order to get the pigeon to stretch its neck, we
simply make it hungry. A selected operant has been added to
all those things which a hungry pigeon will do. Our control
over the response has been pooled with our control over
food

OPERANT BEHAVIOR

69

deprivation. We shall see in Chapter VII that an operant may
also come under the control of an external stimulus, which
is another variable to be used in predicting and controlling
the behavior. We should note, however, that both these
variables are to be distinguished from operant reinforcement
itself.
OPERANT EXTINCTION
When reinforcement is no longer forthcoming, a response
becomes less and less frequent in what is called "operant
extinction." If food is withheld, the pigeon will eventually
stop lifting its head. In general when we engage in behavior
which no longer "pays off," we find ourselves less inclined
to behave in that way again. If we lose a fountain pen, we
reach less and less often into the pocket which formerly
held it. If we get no answer to telephone calls, we eventually
stop telephoning. If our piano goes out of tune, we gradually
play it less and less. If our radio becomes noisy or if
programs become worse, we stop listening.
Since operant extinction takes place much more slowly
than operant conditioning, the process may be followed
more easily. Under suitable conditions smooth curves are
obtained in which the rate of response is seen to decline
slowly, perhaps over a period of many hours. The curves
reveal properties which could not possibly be observed
through casual inspection. We may "get the impression" that
an organism is responding less and less often, but the
orderliness of the change can be seen only when the
behavior is recorded. The curves suggest that there is a fairly
uniform process which determines the output of behavior
during extinction.
Under some circumstances the curve is disturbed by an
emotional effect. The failure of a response to be reinforced
leads not only to operant extinction but also to a reaction
commonly spoken of as frustration or rage. A pigeon which
has failed to receive reinforcement turns away from the key,
cooing, flapping its wings, and engaging in other emotional
behavior (Chapter X). The human organism shows a similar
double effect. The child whose tricycle no longer responds
to pedaling not only stops pedaling but engages in a possibly
violent emotional display. The adult who finds a desk
drawer stuck

70

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

may soon stop pulling, but he may also pound the desk,
exclaim "Damn it!," or exhibit other signs of rage. Just as
the child eventually goes back to the tricycle, and the adult
to the drawer, so the pigeon will turn again to the key when
the emotional response has subsided. As other responses go
unreinforced, another emotional episode may ensue.
Extinction curves under such circumstances show a cyclic
oscillation as the emotional response builds up, disappears,
and builds up again. If we eliminate the emotion by
repeated exposure to extinction, or in other ways, the curve
emerges in a simpler form.
Behavior during extinction is the result of the
conditioning which has preceded it, and in this sense the
extinction curve gives an additional measure of the effect of
reinforcement. If only a few responses have been reinforced,
extinction occurs quickly. A long history of reinforcement is
followed by protracted responding. The resistance to
extinction cannot be predicted from the probability of
response observed at any given moment. We must know the
history of reinforcement. For example, though we have been
reinforced with an excellent meal in a new restaurant, a bad
meal may reduce our patronage to zero; but if we have
found excellent food in a restaurant for many years, several
poor meals must be eaten there, other things being equal,
before we lose the inclination to patronize it again.
There is no simple relation between the number of
responses reinforced and the number which appear in
extinction. As we shall see in Chapter VI, the resistance to
extinction generated by intermittent reinforcement may be
much greater than if the same number of reinforcements are
given for consecutive responses. Thus if we only
occasionally reinforce a child for good behavior, the behavior
survives after we discontinue reinforcement much longer
than if we had reinforced every instance up to the same total
number of reinforcements. This is of practical importance
where the available reinforcers are limited. Problems of this
sort arise in education, industry, economics, and many other
fields. Under some schedules of intermittent reinforcement
as many as 10,000 responses may appear in the behavior of
a pigeon before extinction is substantially complete.

OPERANT BEHAVIOR

71

Extinction is an effective way of removing an operant
from the repertoire of an organism. It should not be
confused with other procedures designed to have the same
effect. The currently preferred technique is punishment,
which, as we shall see in Chapter XII, involves different
processes and is of questionable effectiveness. Forgetting is
frequently confused with extinction. In forgetting, the effect
of conditioning is lost simply as time passes, whereas
extinction requires that the response be emitted without
reinforcement. Usually forgetting does not take place quickly;
sizeable extinction curves have been obtained from pigeons
as long as six years after the response had last been
reinforced. Six years is about half the normal life span of the
pigeon. During the interval the pigeons lived under
circumstances in which the response could not possibly
have been reinforced. In human behavior skilled responses
generated by relatively precise contingencies frequently
survive unused for as much as half a lifetime. The assertion
that early experiences determine the personality of the
mature organism assumes that the effect of operant
reinforcement is long-lasting. Thus if, because of early
childhood experiences, a man marries a woman who
resembles his mother, the effect of certain reinforcements
must have survived for a long time. Most cases of forgetting
involve operant behavior under the control of specific
stimuli and cannot be discussed adequately until that control
has been covered in Chapter VII.
The effects of extinction. The condition in which
extinction is more or less complete is familiar, yet often
misunderstood. Extreme extinction is sometimes called
"abulia." To define this as a "lack of will" is of little help,
since the presence or absence of will is inferred from the
presence or absence of the behavior. The term seems to be
useful, however, in that it implies that the behavior is
lacking for a special reason, and we may make the same
distinction in another way. Behavior is strong or weak
because of many different variables, which it is the task of a
science of behavior to identify and classify. We define any
given case in terms of the variable. The condition which
results from prolonged extinction superficially resembles
inactivity resulting from other causes. The difference is in
the history of the organism. An aspiring writer who has sent
manuscript after

72

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

manuscript to the publishers only to have them all rejected
may report that "he can't write another word." He may be
partially paralyzed with what is called "writer's cramp." He
may still insist that he "wants to write," and we may agree
with him in paraphrase: his extremely low probability of
response is mainly due to extinction. Other variables are still
operative which, if extinction had not taken place, would
yield a high probability.
The condition of low operant strength resulting from
extinction often requires treatment. Some forms of
psychotherapy are systems of reinforcement designed to
reinstate behavior which has been lost through extinction.
The therapist may himself supply the reinforcement, or he
may arrange living conditions in which behavior is likely to
be reinforced. In occupational therapy, for example, the
patient is encouraged to engage in simple forms of behavior
which receive immediate and fairly consistent
reinforcement. It is of no advantage to say that such therapy
helps the patient by giving him a "sense of achievement" or
improves his "morale," builds up his "interest," or removes
or prevents "discouragement." Such terms as these merely
add to the growing population of explanatory fictions. One
who readily engages in a given activity is not showing an
interest, he is showing the effect of reinforcement. We do
not give a man a sense of achievement, we reinforce a
particular action. To become discouraged is simply to fail to
respond because reinforcement has not been forthcoming.
Our problem is simply to account for probability of response
in terms of a history of reinforcement and extinction.
WHAT EVENTS ARE REINFORCING?
In dealing with our fellow men in everyday life and in the
clinic and laboratory, we may need to know just how
reinforcing a specific event is. We often begin by noting the
extent to which our own behavior is reinforced by the same
event. This practice frequently miscarries; yet it is still
commonly believed that reinforcers can be identified apart
from their effects upon a particular organism. As the term is
used here, however, the only defining characteristic of a
reinforcing stimulus is that it reinforces.
The only way to tell whether or not a given event is
reinforcing

OPERANT BEHAVIOR

73

to a given organism under given conditions is to make a
direct test. We observe the frequency of a selected response,
then make an event contingent upon it and observe any
change in frequency. If there is a change, we classify the
event as reinforcing to the organism under the existing
conditions. There is nothing circular about classifying
events in terms of their effects; the criterion is both
empirical and objective. It would be circular, however, if we
then went on to assert that a given event strengthens an
operant because it is reinforcing. We achieve a certain
success in guessing at reinforcing powers only because we
have in a sense made a crude survey; we have gauged the
reinforcing effect of a stimulus upon ourselves and assume
the same effect upon others. We are successful only when
we resemble the organism under study and when we have
correctly surveyed our own behavior.
Events which are found to be reinforcing are of two sorts.
Some reinforcements consist of presenting stimuli, of adding
something— for example, food, water, or sexual contact—to
the situation. These we call positive reinforcers. Others
consist of removing something— for example, a loud noise,
a very bright light, extreme cold or heat, or electric shock—
from the situation. These we call negative rein-forcers. In
both cases the effect of reinforcement is the same—the
probability of response is increased. We cannot avoid this
distinction by arguing that what is reinforcing in the negative
case is the absence of the bright light, loud noise, and so on;
for it is absence after presence which is effective, and this is
only another way of saying that the stimulus is removed.
The difference between the two cases will be clearer when
we consider the presentation of a negative reinforcer or the
removal of a positive. These are the consequences which we
call punishment (Chapter XII).
A survey of the events which reinforce a given individual
is often required in the practical application of operant
conditioning. In every field in which human behavior figures
prominently—education, government, the family, the clinic,
industry, art, literature, and so on— we are constantly
changing probabilities of response by arranging reinforcing
consequences. The industrialist who wants employees to
work consistently and without absenteeism must make
certain that

74

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

their behavior is suitably reinforced—not only with wages
but with suitable working conditions. The girl who wants
another date must be sure that her friend's behavior in
inviting her and in keeping the appointment is suitably
reinforced. To teach a child to read or sing or play a game
effectively, we must work out a program of educational
reinforcement in which appropriate responses "pay off"
frequently. If the patient is to return for further counsel, the
psychotherapist must make sure that the behavior of coming
to him is in some measure reinforced.
We evaluate the strength of reinforcing events when we
attempt to discover what someone is "getting out of life."
What consequences are responsible for his present repertoire
and for the relative frequencies of the responses in it? His
responses to various topics of conversation tell us
something, but his everyday behavior is a better guide. We
infer important reinforcers from nothing more unusual than
his "interest" in a writer who deals with certain subjects, in
stores or museums which exhibit certain objects, in friends
who participate in certain kinds of behavior, in restaurants
which serve certain kinds of food, and so on. The "interest"
refers to the probability which results, at least in part, from
the consequences of the behavior of "taking an interest." We
may be more nearly sure of the importance of a reinforcer if
we watch the behavior come and go as the reinforcer is
alternately supplied and withheld, for the change in
probability is then less likely to be due to an incidental
change of some other sort. The behavior of associating with
a particular friend varies as the friend varies in supplying
reinforcement. If we observe this covariation, we may then
be fairly sure of "what this friendship means" or "what our
subject sees in his friend."
This technique of evaluation may be improved for use in
clinical and laboratory investigation. A direct inventory may
be made by allowing a subject to look at an assortment of
pictures and recording the time he spends on each. The
behavior of looking at a picture is reinforced by what is seen
in it. Looking at one picture may be more strongly
reinforced than looking at another, and the times will vary
accordingly. The information may be valuable if it is
necessary for any reason to reinforce or extinguish our
subject's behavior.

OPERANT BEHAVIOR

75

Literature, art, and entertainment, are contrived reinforcers.
Whether the public buys books, tickets to performances,
and works of art depends upon whether those books, plays,
concerts, or pictures are reinforcing. Frequently the artist
confines himself to an exploration of what is reinforcing to
himself. When he does so his work "reflects his own
individuality," and it is then an accident (or a measure of his
universality) if his book or play or piece of music or picture
is reinforcing to others. Insofar as commercial success is
important, he may make a direct study of the behavior of
others. (The interpretation of the activity of the writer and
artist as an exploration of the reinforcing powers of certain
media will be discussed in Chapter XVI.)
We cannot dispense with this survey simply by asking a
man what reinforces him. His reply may be of some value,
but it is by no means necessarily reliable. A reinforcing
connection need not be obvious to the individual reinforced.
It is often only in retrospect that one's tendencies to behave
in particular ways are seen to be the result of certain
consequences, and, as we shall see in Chapter XVIII, the
relation may never be seen at all even though it is obvious to
others.
There are, of course, extensive differences between
individuals in the events which prove to be reinforcing. The
differences between species are so great as scarcely to
arouse interest; obviously what is reinforcing to a horse need
not be reinforcing to a dog or man. Among the members of a
species, the extensive differences are less likely to be due to
hereditary endowment, and to that extent may be traced to
circumstances in the history of the individual. The fact that
organisms evidently inherit the capacity to be reinforced by
certain kinds of events does not help us in predicting the
reinforcing effect of an untried stimulus. Nor does the
relation between the reinforcing event and deprivation or any
other condition of the organism endow the reinforcing event
with any particular physical property. It is especially unlikely
that events which have acquired their power to reinforce will
be marked in any special way. Yet such events are an
important species of reinforcer.

76

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

CONDITIONED REINFORCERS
The stimulus which is presented in operant reinforcement
may be paired with another in respondent conditioning. In
Chapter IV, we considered the acquisition of the power to
elicit a response; now we are concerned with the power to
reinforce. Although reinforcement is a different stimulus
function, the process resulting from the pairing of stimuli
appears to be the same. If we have frequently presented a
dish of food to a hungry organism, the empty dish will elicit
salivation. To some extent the empty dish will also reinforce
an operant.
We can demonstrate conditioned reinforcement more readily
with stimuli which can be better controlled. If each time we
turn on a light we give food to a hungry pigeon, the light
eventually becomes a conditioned reinforcer. It may be used to
condition an operant just as food is used. We know something
about how the light acquires this property: the more often
the light is paired with the food, the more reinforcing it
becomes; the food must not follow the light by too great an
interval of time; and the reinforcing power is rapidly lost
when all food is withheld. We should expect all of this from
our knowledge of stimulus conditioning.
Conditioned reinforcers are often the product of natural
contingencies. Usually, food and water are received only after
the organism has engaged in "precurrent" behavior—after it has
operated upon the environment to create the opportunity for
eating or drinking. The stimuli generated by this precurrent
behavior, therefore, become reinforcing. Thus before we can
transfer food from a plate to oui mouth successfully, we
must get near the plate, and any behavior which brings us
near the plate is automatically reinforced. The pre-current
behavior is, therefore, sustained in strength. This is important
since only a small part of behavior is immediately reinforced
with food, water, sexual contact, or other events of obvious
biological importance. Although it is characteristic of
human behavior that primary reinforcers may be effective
after long delay, this is presumably only because intervening
events become conditioned rein-forcers. When a man puts
storm windows on his house in October because, similar
behavior last October was followed by a warm house

OPERANT BEHAVIOR

77

in January, we need to bridge the gap between the behavior
in October and the effect in January. Among the conditioned
reinforcers responsible for the strength of this behavior are
certain verbal consequences supplied by the man himself or
by his neighbors. It is often important to fill in a series of
events between an act and an ultimate primary
reinforcement in order to control behavior for practical
purposes. In education, industry, psychotherapy, and many
other fields, we encounter techniques which are designed to
create appropriate conditioned reinforcers. The effect of
providing immediately effective consequences where
ultimate consequences are delayed is to "improve morale,"
to "heighten interest," to "prevent discouragement" or to
correct the condition of low operant strength which we
called abulia, and so on. More concretely, it is to induce
students to study, employees to come to work, patients to
engage in acceptable social behavior, and so on.
Generalized reinforcers. A conditioned reinforcer is
generalized when it is paired with more than one primary
reinforcer. The generalized reinforcer is useful because the
momentary condition of the organism is not likely to be
important. The operant strength generated by a single
reinforcement is observed only under an appropriate
condition of deprivation—when we reinforce with food, we
gain control over the hungry man. But if a conditioned
reinforcer has been paired with reinforcers appropriate to
many conditions, at least one appropriate state of
deprivation is more likely to prevail upon a later occasion.
A response is therefore more likely to occur. When we
reinforce with money, for example, our subsequent control
is relatively independent of momentary deprivations. One
kind of generalized reinforcer is created because many
primary reinforcers are received only after the physical
environment has been efficiently manipulated. One form of
precurrent behavior may precede different kinds of
reinforcers upon different occasions. The immediate
stimulation from such behavior will thus become a
generalized reinforcer. We are automatically reinforced,
apart from any particular deprivation, when we successfully
control the physical world. This may explain our tendency
to engage in skilled crafts, in artistic creation, and in such
sports as bowling, billiards, and tennis.

78

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

It is possible, however, that some of the reinforcing effect
of "sensory feed-back" is unconditioned. A baby appears to be
reinforced by stimulation from the environment which has
not been followed by primary reinforcement. The baby's
rattle is an example. The capacity to be reinforced in this
way could have arisen in the evolutionary process, and it
may have a parallel in the reinforcement we receive from
simply "making the world behave." Any organism which is
reinforced by its success in manipulating nature, regardless
of the momentary consequences, will be in a favored
position when important consequences follow.
Several important generalized reinforcers arise when
behavior is reinforced by other people. A simple case is
attention. The child who misbehaves "just to get attention"
is familiar. The attention of people is reinforcing because it
is a necessary condition for other reinforcements from them.
In general, only people who are attending to us reinforce our
behavior. The attention of someone who is particularly
likely to supply reinforcement—a parent, a teacher, or a
loved one—is an especially good generalized reinforcer and
sets up especially strong attention-getting behavior. Many
verbal responses specifically demand attention—for
example, "Look," "See," or the vocative use of a name.
Other characteristic forms of behavior which are commonly
strong because they receive attention are feigning illness,
being annoying, and being conspicuous (exhibitionism).
Attention is often not enough. Another person is likely to
reinforce only that part of one's behavior of which he
approves, and any sign of his approval therefore becomes
reinforcing in its own right. Behavior which evokes a smile
or the verbal response "That's right" or "Good" or any other
commendation is strengthened. We use this generalized
reinforcer to establish and shape the behavior of others,
particularly in education. For example, we teach both
children and adults to speak correctly by saying "That's
right" when appropriate behavior is emitted.
A still stronger generalized reinforcer is affection. It may
be especially connected with sexual contact as a primary
reinforcer but when anyone who shows affection supplies
other kinds of reinforcement as well, the effect is
generalized.

OPERANT BEHAVIOR

79

It is difficult to define, observe, and measure attention,
approval, and affection. They are not things but aspects of
the behavior of others. Their subtle physical dimensions
present difficulties not only for the scientist who must study
them but also for the individual who is reinforced by them. If
we do not easily see that someone is paying attention or that
he approves or is affectionate, our behavior will not be
consistently reinforced. It may therefore be weak, may tend
to occur at the wrong time, and so on. We do not "know
what to do to get attention or affection or when to do it."
The child struggling for attention, the lover for a sign of
affection, and the artist for professional approval show the
persevering behavior which, as we shall see in Chapter VI,
results from only intermittent reinforcement.
Another generalized reinforcer is the submissiveness of
others. When someone has been coerced into supplying
various reinforcements, any indication of his acquiescence
becomes a generalized rein-forcer. The bully is reinforced by
signs of cowardice, and members of the ruling class by signs
of deference. Prestige and esteem are generalized reinforcers
only insofar as they guarantee that other people will act in
certain ways. That "having one's own way" is reinforcing is
shown by the behavior of those who control for the sake of
control. The physical dimensions of submissiveness are
usually not so subtle as those of attention, approval, or
affection. The bully may insist upon a clear-cut sign of his
dominance, and ritualistic practices emphasize deference
and respect.
A generalized reinforcer distinguished by its physical
specifications is the token. The commonest example is
money. It is the generalized reinforcer par excellence
because, although "money won't buy everything," it can be
exchanged for primary reinforcers of great variety. Behavior
reinforced with money is relatively independent of the
momentary deprivation of the organism, and the general
usefulness of money as a reinforcer depends in part upon this
fact. Its effectiveness is also due to its physical dimensions.
These permit a sharper contingency between behavior and
consequence: when we are paid in money, we know what
our behavior has accomplished and what behavior has
accomplished it. The reinforcing effect can also be more
successfully conditioned: the exchange value of money is
more

80

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

obvious than that of attention, approval, affection, or even
submis-siveness.
Money is not the only token. In education, for example,
the individual behaves in part because of the marks, grades,
and diplomas which he has received. These are not so
readily exchanged for primary reinforcement as money, but
the possibility of exchange is there. Educational tokens form
a series in which one may be exchanged for the next, and
the commercial or prestige value of the final token, the
diploma, is usually clear. As a rule, prizes, medals, and
scholarships for high marks or specialized skills or
achievements are not explicitly paired with primary
reinforcers, but the clear-cut physical dimensions of such
awards are an advantage in arranging contingencies. Usually
the ultimate reinforcement is similar to that of prestige or
esteem.
It is easy to forget the origins of the generalized
reinforcers and to regard them as reinforcing in their own
right. We speak of the "need for attention, approval, or
affection," "the need to dominate," and "the love of money"
as if they were primary conditions of deprivation. But a
capacity to be reinforced in this way could scarcely have
evolved in the short time during which the required
conditions have prevailed. Attention, affection, approval,
and submission have presumably existed in human society
for only a very brief period, as the process of evolution
goes. Moreover, they do not represent fixed forms of
stimulation, since they depend upon the idiosyncrasies of
particular groups. Insofar as affection is mainly sexual, it
may be related to a condition of primary deprivation which
is to some extent independent of the personal history of the
individual, but the "signs of affection" which become
reinforcing because of their association with sexual contact
or with other reinforcers can scarcely be reinforcing for
genetic reasons. Tokens are of even more recent advent, and
it is not often seriously suggested that the need for them is
inherited. We can usually watch the process through which a
child comes to be reinforced by money. Yet the "love of
money" often seems to be autonomous as the "need for
approval," and if we confined ourselves to the observed
effectiveness of these generalized reinforcers, we should
have as much reason for assuming an inherited

OPERANT BEHAVIOR

81

need for money as for attention, approval, affection, or
domination. Eventually generalized reinforcers are effective
even though the primary reinforcers upon which they are
based no longer accompany them. We play games of skill
for their own sake. We get attention or approval for its own
sake. Affection is not always followed by a more explicit
sexual reinforcement. The submissiveness of others is
reinforcing even though we make no use of it. A miser may
be so reinforced by money that he will starve rather than
give it up. These observable facts must have their place in
any theoretical or practical consideration. They do not mean
that generalized reinforcers are anything more than the
physical properties of the stimuli observed in each case or
that there are any nonphysical entities which must be taken
into account.
WHY IS A REINFORCER REINFORCING?
The Law of Effect is not a theory. It is simply a rule for
strengthening behavior. When we reinforce a response and
observe a change in its frequency, we can easily report what
has happened in objective terms. But in explaining why it
has happened we are likely to resort to theory. Why does
reinforcement reinforce? One theory is that an organism
repeats a response because it finds the consequences
"pleasant" or "satisfying." But in what sense is this an
explanation within the framework of a natural science?
"Pleasant" or "satisfying" apparently do not refer to physical
properties of reinforcing events, since the physical sciences
use neither these terms nor any equivalents. The terms must
refer to some effect upon the organism, but can we define
this in such a way that it will be useful in accounting for
reinforcement?
It is sometimes argued that a thing is pleasant if an
organism approaches or maintains contact with it and
unpleasant if the organism avoids it or cuts it short. There
are many variations on this attempt to find an objective
definition, but they are all subject to the same criticism: the
behavior specified may be merely another product of the
reinforcing effect. To say that a stimulus is pleasant in the
sense that an organism tends to approach or prolong it may
be only another way of saying that the stimulus has
reinforced the

82

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

behavior of approaching or prolonging. Instead of defining a
reinforcing effect in terms of its effect upon behavior in
general, we have simply specified familiar behavior which
is almost inevitably reinforced and hence generally
available as an indicator of reinforcing power. It we then go
on to say that a stimulus is reinforcing because it is
pleasant, what purports to be an explanation in terms of two
effects is in reality a redundant description of one.
An alternative approach is to define "pleasant" and
"unpleasant" (or "satisfying" and "annoying") by asking the
subject how he "feels" about certain events. This assumes
that reinforcement has two effects —it strengthens behavior
and generates "feelings"—and that one is a function of the
other. But the functional relation may be in the other
direction. When a man reports that an event is pleasant, he
may be merely reporting that it is the sort of event which
reinforces him or toward which he finds himself tending to
move because it has reinforced such movement. We shall
see in Chapter XVII that one could probably not acquire
verbal responses with respect to pleasantness as a purely
private fact unless something like this were so. In any case,
the subject himself is not at an especially good point of
vantage for making such observations. "Subjective
judgments" of the pleasantness or satisfaction provided by
stimuli are usually unreliable and inconsistent. As the
doctrine of the unconscious has emphasized, we may not be
able to report at all upon events which can be shown to be
reinforcing to us or we may make a report which is in direct
con-.flict with objective observations; we may report as
unpleasant a type of event which can be shown to be
reinforcing. Examples of this anomaly range from
masochism to martyrdom.
It is sometimes argued that reinforcement is effective
because it reduces a state of deprivation. Here at least is a
collateral effect which need not be confused with
reinforcement itself. It is obvious that deprivation is
important in operant conditioning. We used a hungry pigeon
in our experiment, and we could not have demonstrated
operant conditioning otherwise. The hungrier the bird, the
oftener it responds as the result of reinforcement. But in
spite of this connection it is not true that reinforcement
always reduces deprivation. Conditioning may occur before
any substantial change can take place

OPERANT BEHAVIOR

83

in the deprivation measured in other ways. All we can say is
that the type of event which reduces deprivation is also
reinforcing.
The connection between reinforcement and satiation must
be sought in the process of evolution. We can scarcely
overlook the great biological significance of the primary
reinforcers. Food, water, and sexual contact, as well as
escape from injurious conditions (Chapter XI), are
obviously connected with the well-being of the organism.
An individual who is readily reinforced by such events will
acquire highly efficient behavior. It is also biologically
advantageous if the behavior due to a given reinforcement
is especially likely to occur in an appropriate state of
deprivation. Thus it is important, not only that any behavior
which leads to the receipt of food should become an
important part of a repertoire, but that this behavior should
be particularly strong when the organism is hungry. These
two advantages are presumably responsible for the fact that
an organism can be reinforced in specific ways and that the
result will be observed in relevant conditions of deprivation.
Some forms of stimulation are positively reinforcing
although they do not appear to elicit behavior having
biological significance. A baby is reinforced, not only by
food, but by the tinkle of a bell or the sparkle of a bright
object. Behavior which is consistently followed by such
stimuli shows an increased probability. It is difficult, if not
impossible, to trace these reinforcing effects to a history of
conditioning. Later we may find the same individual being
reinforced by an orchestra or a colorful spectacle. Here it is
more difficult to make sure that the reinforcing effect is not
conditioned. However, we may plausibly argue that a
capacity to be reinforced by any feedback from the
environment would be biologically advantageous, since it
would prepare the organism to manipulate the environment
successfully before a given state of deprivation developed.
When the organism generates a tactual feed-back, as in
feeling the texture of a piece of cloth or the surface of a
piece of sculpture, the conditioning is commonly regarded
as resulting from sexual reinforcement, even when the area
stimulated is not primarily sexual in function. It is tempting
to suppose that other forms of stimulation produced by
behavior are similarly related to biologically important
events.

84

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

When the environment changes, a capacity to be
reinforced by a given event may have a biological
disadvantage. Sugar is highly reinforcing to most members
of the human species, as the ubiquitous candy counter
shows. Its effect in this respect far exceeds current
biological requirements. This was not true before sugar had
been grown and refined on an extensive scale. Until a few
hundred years ago, the strong reinforcing effect of sugar must
have been a biological advantage. The environment has
changed, but the genetic endowment of the organism has
not followed suit. Sex provides another example. There is
no longer a biological advantage in the great reinforcing
effect of sexual contact, but we need not go back many
hundreds of years to find conditions of famine and
pestilence under which the power of sexual reinforcement
offered a decisive advantage.
A biological explanation of reinforcing power is perhaps as
far as we can go in saying why an event is reinforcing. Such
an explanation is probably of little help in a functional
analysis, for it does not provide us with any way of
identifying a reinforcing stimulus as such before we have
tested its reinforcing power upon a given organism. We must
therefore be content with a survey in terms of the effects of
stimuli upon behavior.
ACCIDENTAL
CONTINGENCIES AND
"SUPERSTITIOUS" BEHAVIOR
It has been argued that Thorndike's experiment is not
typical of the learning process because the cat cannot "see
the connection" between moving a latch and escaping from a
box. But seeing a connection is not essential in operant
conditioning. Both during and after the process of
conditioning, the human subject often talks about his
behavior in relation to his environment (Chapter XVII). His
reports may be useful in a scientific account, and his
reaction to his own behavior may even be an important link
in certain complex processes. But such reports or reactions
are not required in the simple process of operant
conditioning. This is evident in the fact that one may not be
able to describe a contingency which has clearly had an
effect.
Nor need there be any permanent connection between a
response and its reinforcement. We made the receipt of food
contingent upon

OPERANT BEHAVIOR

85

the response of our pigeon by arranging a mechanical and
electrical connection. Outside the laboratory various
physical systems are responsible for contingencies between
behavior and its consequences. But these need not, and
usually do not, affect the organism in any other way. So far
as the organism is concerned, the only important property of
the contingency is temporal. The reinforcer simply follows
the response. How this is brought about does not matter.
We must assume that the presentation of a reinforcer
always reinforces something, since it necessarily coincides
with some behavior. We have also seen that a single
reinforcement may have a substantial effect. If there is only
an accidental connection between the response and the
appearance of a reinforcer, the behavior is called
"superstitious." We may demonstrate this in the pigeon by
accumulating the effect of several accidental contingencies.
Suppose we give a pigeon a small amount of food every
fifteen seconds regardless of what it is doing. When food is
first given, the pigeon will be behaving in some way—if only
standing still—and conditioning will take place. It is then
more probable that the same behavior will be in progress
when food is given again. If this proves to be the case, the
"operant" will be further strengthened. If not, some other
behavior will be strengthened. Eventually a given bit of
behavior reaches a frequency at which it is often reinforced. It
then becomes a permanent part of the repertoire of the bird,
even though the food has been given by a clock which is
unrelated to the bird's behavior. Conspicuous responses
which have been established in this way include turning
sharply to one side, hopping from one foot to the other and
back, bowing and scraping, turning around, strutting, and
raising the head. The topography of the behavior may
continue to drift with further reinforcements, since slight
modifications in the form of response may coincide with the
receipt of food.
In producing superstitious behavior, the intervals at which
food is given are important. At sixty seconds the effect of
one reinforcement is largely lost before another can occur,
and other behavior is more likely to appear. Superstitious
behavior is therefore less likely to emerge, though it may do
so if the experiment is carried on for a long time. At fifteen
seconds the effect is usually almost immediate.

86

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

When a superstitious response has once been established, it
will survive even when reinforced only infrequently.
The pigeon is not exceptionally gullible. Human behavior
is also heavily superstitious. Only a small part of the
behavior strengthened by accidental contingencies develops
into the ritualistic practices which we call "superstitions,"
but the same principle is at work. Suppose we find a tendollar bill while walking through the park (and suppose this
is an event which has a considerable reinforcing effect).
Whatever we were doing, or had just been doing, at the
moment we found the bill must be assumed to be reinforced.
It would be difficult to prove this in a rigorous way, of
course, but it is probable that we shall be more likely to go
walking again, particularly in the same or a similar park, that
we shall be slightly more likely to keep our eyes cast
downward precisely as we did when we saw the money, and
so on. This behavior will vary with any state of deprivation
to which money is relevant. We should not call it
superstitious, but it is generated by a contingency which is
only rarely "functional."
Some contingencies which produce superstitious behavior
are not entirely accidental. A response is sometimes likely to
be followed by a consequence which it nevertheless does not
"produce." The best examples involve a type of stimulus
which is reinforcing when removed (Chapter XI). The
termination of a brief stimulus of this sort may occur at just
the right time to reinforce the behavior generated by its
onset. The aversive stimulus appears and the organism
becomes active; the stimulus terminates, and this reinforces
some part of the behavior. Certain illnesses, lamenesses, and
allergic reactions are of such duration that any measure
taken to "cure" them is likely to be reinforced when the
condition clears up. The measure need not actually be
responsible for the cure. The elaborate rituals of
nonscientific medicine appear to be explained by this
characteristic of many forms of illness.
In superstitious operant behavior, as in the superstitious
conditioned reflexes discussed in Chapter IV, the process of
conditioning has miscarried. Conditioning offers tremendous
advantages in equipping the organism with behavior which is
effective in a novel environment, but there appears to be no
way of preventing the acquisition of

OPERANT BEHAVIOR

87

non-advantageous behavior through accident. Curiously,
this difficulty must have increased as the process of
conditioning was accelerated in the course of evolution. If,
for example, three reinforcements were always required in
order to change the probability of a response, superstitious
behavior would be unlikely. It is only because organisms have
reached the point at which a single contingency makes a
substantial change that they are vulnerable to coincidences.
Superstitious rituals in human society usually involve
verbal formulae and are transmitted as part of the culture.
To this extent they differ from the simple effect of
accidental operant reinforcement. But they must have had
their origin in the same process, and they are probably
sustained by occasional contingencies which follow the
same pattern.
GOALS, PURPOSES, AND OTHER FINAL CAUSES
It is not correct to say that operant reinforcement
"strengthens the response which precedes it." The response
has already occurred and cannot be changed. What is
changed is the future probability of responses in the same
class. It is the operant as a class of behavior, rather than the
response as a particular instance, which is conditioned.
There is, therefore, no violation of the fundamental principle
of science which rules out "final causes." But this principle is
violated when it is asserted that behavior is under the control
of an "incentive" or "goal" which the organism has not yet
achieved or a "purpose" which it has not yet fulfilled.
Statements which use such words as "incentive" or "purpose"
are usually reducible to statements about operant
conditioning, and only a slight change is required to bring
them within the framework of a natural science. Instead of
saying that a man behaves because of the consequences
which are to follow his behavior, we simply say that he
behaves because of the consequences which have followed
similar behavior in the past. This is of course, the Law of
Effect or operant conditioning.
It is sometimes argued that a response is not fully
described until its purpose is referred to as a current
property. But what is meant by "describe"? If we observe
someone walking down the street, we may report this event
in the language of physical science. If we then add

88

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

that "his purpose is to mail a letter," have we said anything
which was not included in our first report? Evidently so, since
a man may walk down the street "for many purposes" and in
the same physical way in each case. But the distinction which
needs to be made is not between instances of behavior; it is
between the variables of which behavior is a function. Purpose
is not a property of the behavior itself; it is a way of referring to
controlling variables. If we make our report after we have seen
our subject mail his letter and turn back, we attribute
"purpose" to him from the event which brought the behavior
of walking down the street to an end. This event "gives
meaning" to his performance, not by amplifying a
description of the behavior as such, but by indicating an
independent variable of which it may have been a function. We
cannot see his "purpose" before seeing that he mails a letter,
unless we have observed similar behavior and similar
consequences before. Where we have done this, we use the
term simply to predict that he will mail a letter upon this
occasion.
Nor can our subject see his own purpose without
reference to similar events. If we ask him why he is going
down the street or what his purpose is and he says, "I am going
to mail a letter," we have not learned anything new about his
behavior but only about some of its possible causes. The
subject himself, of course, may be in an advantageous position
in describing these variables because he has had an extended
contact with his own behavior for many years. But his statement
is not therefore in a different class from similar statements
made by others who have observed his behavior upon fewer
occasions. As we shall see in Chapter XVII, he is simply making
a plausible prediction in terms of his experiences with himself.
Moreover, he may be wrong. He may report that he is "going
to mail a letter," and he may indeed carry an unmailed letter
in his hand and may mail it at the end of the street, but we
may still be able to show that his behavior is primarily
determined by the fact that upon past occasions he has
encountered someone who is important to him upon just such a
walk. He may not be "aware of this purpose" in the sense of
being able to say that his behavior is strong for this reason.
The fact that operant behavior seems to be "directed
toward the

OPERANT BEHAVIOR

89

future" is misleading. Consider, for example, the case of
"looking for something." In what sense is the "something"
which has not yet been found relevant to the behavior?
Suppose we condition a pigeon to peck a spot on the wall of
a box and then, when the operant is well established,
remove the spot. The bird now goes to the usual place along
the wall. It raises its head, cocks its eye in the usual
direction, and may even emit a weak peck in the usual place.
Before extinction is very far advanced, it returns to the same
place again and again in similar behavior. Must we say that
the pigeon is "looking for the spot"? Must we take the
"looked for" spot into account in explaining the behavior?
It is not difficult to interpret this example in terms of
operant reinforcement. Since visual stimulation from the
spot has usually preceded the receipt of food, the spot has
become a conditioned re-inforcer. It strengthens the
behavior of looking in given directions from different
positions. Although we have undertaken to condition only
the pecking response, we have in fact strengthened many
different kinds of precurrent behavior which bring the bird
into positions from which it sees the spot and pecks it. These
responses continue to appear, even though we have removed
the spot, until extinction occurs. The spot which is "being
looked for" is the spot which has occurred in the past as the
immediate reinforcement of the behavior of looking. In
general, looking for something consists of emitting
responses which in the past have produced "something" as a
consequence.
The same interpretation applies to human behavior. When
we see a man moving about a room opening drawers,
looking under magazines, and so on, we may describe his
behavior in fully objective terms: "Now he is in a certain
part of the room; he has grasped a book between the thumb
and forefinger of his right hand; he is lifting the book and
bending his head so that any object under the book can be
seen." We may also "interpret" his behavior or "read a
meaning into it" by saying that "he is looking for
something" or, more specifically, that "he is looking for his
glasses." What we have added is not a further description of
his behavior but an inference about some of the variables
responsible for it. There is no current goal, in-

90

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

centive, purpose, or meaning to be taken into account. This
is so even if we ask him what he is doing and he says, "I am
looking for my glasses." This is not a further description of
his behavior but of the variables of which his behavior is a
function; it is equivalent to "I have lost my glasses," "I shall
stop what I am doing when I find my glasses," or "When I
have done this in the past, I have found my glasses." These
translations may seem unnecessarily roundabout, but only
because expressions involving goals and purposes are
abbreviations.
Very often we attribute purpose to behavior as another
way of describing its biological adaptability. This issue has
already been discussed, but one point may be added. In both
operant conditioning and the evolutionary selection of
behavioral characteristics, consequences alter future
probability. Reflexes and other innate patterns of behavior
evolve because they increase the chances of survival of the
species. Operants grow strong because they are followed by
important consequences in the life of the individual. Both
processes raise the question of purpose for the same reason,
and in both the appeal to a final cause may be rejected in the
same way. A spider does not possess the elaborate behavioral
repertoire with which it constructs a web because that web
will enable it to capture the food it needs to survive. It
possesses this behavior because similar behavior on the part
of spiders in the past has enabled them to capture the food
they needed to survive. A series of events have been relevant
to the behavior of web-making in its earlier evolutionary
history. We are wrong in saying that we observe the
"purpose" of the web when we observe similar events in the
life of the individual.

CHAPTER VI

SHAPING AND MAINTAINING
OPERANT BEHAVIOR
THE CONTINUITY OF BEHAVIOR
Operant conditioning shapes behavior as a sculptor
shapes a lump of clay. Although at some point the sculptor
seems to have produced an entirely novel object, we can
always follow the process back to the original undifferentiated
lump, and we can make the successive stages by which we
return to this condition as small as we wish. At no point does
anything emerge which is very different from what preceded
it. The final product seems to have a special unity or
integrity of design, but we cannot find a point at which this
suddenly appears. In the same sense, an operant is not
something which appears full grown in the behavior of the
organism. It is the result of a continuous shaping process.
The pigeon experiment demonstrates this clearly. "Raising
the head" is not a discrete unit of behavior. It does not come,
so to speak, in a separate package. We reinforce only slightly
exceptional values of the behavior observed while the pigeon
is standing or moving about. We succeed in shifting the whole
range of heights at which the head is held, but there is
nothing which can be accurately de91

92

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

scribed as a new "response." A response such as turning the
latch in a problem box appears to be a more discrete unit, but
only because the continuity with other behavior is more difficult
to observe. In the pigeon, the response of pecking at a spot on
the wall of the experimental box seems to differ from stretching
the neck because no other behavior of the pigeon resembles it.
If in reinforcing such a response we simply wait for it to occur
—and we may have to wait many hours or days or weeks—the
whole unit appears to emerge in its final form and to be
strengthened as such. There may be no appreciable behavior
which we could describe as "almost pecking the spot."
The continuous connection between such an operant and the
general behavior of the bird can nevertheless easily be
demonstrated. It is the basis of a practical procedure for setting
up a complex response. To get the pigeon to peck the spot as
quickly as possible we proceed as follows: We first give the
bird food when it turns slightly in the direction of the spot
from any part of the cage. This increases the frequency of
such behavior. We then withhold reinforcement until a slight
movement is made toward the spot. This again alters the
general distribution of behavior without producing a new unit.
We continue by reinforcing positions successively closer to the
spot, then by reinforcing only when the head is moved slightly
forward, and finally only when the beak actually makes
contact with the spot. We may reach this final response in a
remarkably short time. A hungry bird, well adapted to the
situation and to the food tray, can usually be brought to
respond in this way in two or three minutes.
The original probability of the response in its final form is
very low; in some cases it may even be zero. In this way we can
build complicated operants which would never appear in the
repertoire of the organism otherwise. By reinforcing a series of
successive approximations, we bring a rare response to a very
high probability in a short time. This is an effective procedure
because it recognizes and utilizes the continuous nature of a
complex act. The total act of turning toward the spot from
any point the box, walking toward it, raising the head, and
striking the spot may seem to be a functionally coherent unit of
behavior; but it is constructed by a continual process of
differential reinforcement from undifferentiated behavior, just
as the

SHAPING AND MAINTAINING OPERANT BEHAVIOR

93

sculptor shapes his figure from a lump of clay. When we wait
for a single complete instance, we reinforce a similar sequence
but far less effectively because the earlier steps are not
optimally strengthened.
This account is inaccurate in one respect. We may detect a
discontinuity between bringing the head close to the spot and
pecking. The pecking movement usually emerges as an
obviously preformed unit. There are two possible
explanations. A mature pigeon will already have developed a
well-defined pecking response which may emerge upon the
present occasion. The history of this response might show a
similar continuity if we could follow it. It is possible, however,
that there is a genetic discontinuity, and that in a bird such as
the pigeon the pecking response has a special strength and a
special coherence as a form of species behavior. Vomiting and
sneezing are human responses which probably have a similar
genetic unity. Continuity with other behavior must be sought in
the evolutionary process. But these genetic units are rare, at
least in the vertebrates. The behavior with which we are
usually concerned, from either a theoretical or practical point of
view, is continuously modified from a basic material which is
largely undifferentiated.
Through the reinforcement of slightly exceptional instances
of his behavior, a child learns to raise himself, to stand, to
walk, to grasp objects, and to move them about. Later on,
through the same process, he learns to talk, to sing, to dance, to
play games—in short, to exhibit the enormous repertoire
characteristic of the normal adult. When we survey behavior in
these later stages, we find it convenient to distinguish between
various operants which differ from each other in topography and
produce different consequences. In this way behavior is
broken into parts to facilitate analysis. These parts are the
units which we count and whose frequencies play an
important role in arriving at laws of behavior. They are the
"acts" into which, in the vocabulary of the layman, behavior
is divided. But if we are to account for many of its quantitative
properties, the ultimately continuous nature of behavior must
not be forgotten.
Neglect of this characteristic has been responsible for several
difficult problems in behavior theory. An example is the effect
sometimes spoken of as "response generalization," "transfer,"
or "response in-

94

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

duction." In reinforcing one operant we often produce a
noticeable increase in the strength of another. Training in
one area of skilled behavior may improve performance in
another. Success in one field of activity may increase the
tendency to be active in other fields. By arranging optimal
reinforcing contingencies in the clinic or institution, the
psychotherapist strengthens behavior in the world at large.
But how is this possible? What is the "transfer" which
appears to strengthen behavior without reinforcing it
directly? This is a good example of a pseudo problem. We
divide behavior into hard and fast units and are then
surprised to find that the organism disregards the boundaries
we have set. It is difficult to conceive of two responses which
do not have something in common. Sometimes the same
muscular system is used. The effect of a reinforcement may
reflect this fact rather than our arbitrary practice of calling
the responses separate units. Again, when we reinforce the
final response in a sequence containing many precurrent
members, we may strengthen all units which contain the
same precurrent members. Our skill in manipulating tools and
instruments transfers from one field of reinforcement to
another. The traditional explanation of transfer asserts that
the second response is strengthened only insofar as the
responses "possess identical elements." This is an effort to
maintain the notion of a unit of response. A more useful way
of putting it is to say that the elements are strengthened
wherever they occur. This leads us to identify the element
rather than the response as the unit of behavior. It is a sort of
behavioral atom, which may never appear by itself upon any
single occasion but is the essential ingredient or component
of all observed instances. The reinforcement of a response
increases the probability of all responses containing the
same elements. Verbal behavior supplies especially good
examples of the need to consider these atoms. An enormous
number of verbal responses are executed by the same
musculature. They are responses, therefore, which are
presumably composed of a fairly small number of identical
elements. This is not usually recognized in the customary
practice of regarding verbal behavior as composed of
separate units—for example, the "words" of the
grammarian. A rigorous analysis shows that the word is by
no means the functional unit. Larger complexes of words—
idioms,

SHAPING AND MAINTAINING OPERANT BEHAVIOR

95

phrases, or memorized passages—may vary together under
the control of a single variable. On the other hand, we may
observe the separate functional control of "atoms" at least as
small as the separate speech sounds. We have to recognize
these small units in order to account for such distorted
verbal responses as spoonerisms and certain verbal slips, as
well as the stylistic devices of alliteration, assonance, rhyme,
and rhythm.
We lack adequate tools to deal with the continuity of
behavior or with the interaction among operants attributable
to common atomic units. The operant represents a valid
level of analysis, however, because the properties which
define a response are observable data. A given set of
properties may be given a functional unity. Although
methods must eventually be developed which will not
emphasize units at this level, they are not necessary to our
understanding of the principal dynamic properties of
behavior.
DIFFERENTIAL REINFORCEMENT
Although operant reinforcement is always a matter of
selecting certain magnitudes of response as against others,
we may distinguish between producing a relatively
complete new unit and making slight changes in the
direction of greater effectiveness in an existing unit. In the
first case, we are interested in how behavior is acquired; in
the second, in how it is refined. It is the difference between
"knowing how to do something" and "doing it well." The
latter is the field of skill.
The contingency which improves skill is the differential
reinforcement of responses possessing special properties. It
may be supplied automatically by the mechanical
exigencies of the environment. In learning to throw a ball
well, for example, certain responses must release the ball
from the fingers at the moment of its greatest forward
speed. These responses are differentially reinforced by the
fact that, when so released, the ball covers a considerable
distance. Other instances in which the release comes before
or after the proper moment are not so reinforced. We are
likely to forget how complex an act this is and how much
differential reinforcement is required in the young child to
produce a properly timed sequence. In games, crafts,

96

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

and certain artistic performances extremely fine differences in
the execution of behavior make important differences in the
consequences. (The consequences at issue are generally the
conditioned reinforcers summarized in Chapter V. Primary
reinforcers are seldom involved. The negative reinforcers to be
considered in Chapter XI also are important. For example, the
consequences which are effective in conditioning postural
responses in locomotion or the maintenance of an upright
position are largely the avoidance of falls, bumps, and
awkward or painful postures.)
The reinforcement which develops skill must be immediate.
Otherwise, the precision of the differential effect is lost. In
many practical areas skilled behavior is encouraged by
arranging a quick report of accomplishment. In rifle practice,
for example, extremely small-scale properties of response are
differentially reinforced by a hit or a miss. Properties of this
magnitude can be selected only if the differential
reinforcement is immediate. But even when a hit can be seen
by the rifleman, the report is delayed by the time which the
bullet takes to reach .the target. Possibly this gap is bridged by
conditioned reinforcement from the "feel" of the shot. The
rifleman eventually "knows" before the target is hit whether
the shot was good or bad. His own behavior generates a
stimulating feed-back, certain forms of which are followed by
hits, others by misses. The more immediate problem is to shoot
in such a way as to generate the "feel" followed by a hit. In
more vigorous enterprises the feed-back is clearer. Good form
in bowling, for example, is reinforced by feed-back from the
bowler's body. This does not mean that the rifleman will
continue to shoot well, or the bowler to bowl well, even
though he receives no report of the effect upon the target or
pins. The report is needed to maintain the conditioned
reinforcing power of the feed-back.
If the differential contingencies change, the topography of
behavior changes with them. Even the very common
responses which enable us to walk upright continue to be
modified by the environment. When we walk on the deck of
a ship at sea, a special set of contingencies prevails in
maintaining our orientation in the gravitational field. The
new differential reinforcement sets up "sea legs." At the end
of the voyage the old contingencies work a reverse change.
Con-

SHAPING AND MAINTAINING OPERANT BEHAVIOR

97

tingencies of reinforcement which are arranged by society are
especially likely to shift. Verbal behavior supplies many good
examples. In the nursery, crude vocal responses are
successful; the indulgent parent may even reinforce "baby
talk" into adolescent or adult years. But eventually, verbal
behavior is successful only when it generates suitable behavior
in the average listener; therefore, the form of the behavior
comes to correspond more and more closely to the standards of
a given community. When we move from one community to
another, the topography of our behavior may change.
Some differential reinforcements make a response more or
less intense or forceful without appreciably altering its
topography. Certain natural contingencies in the environment
lead us to push or lift harder to move objects, to pull harder to
break objects apart, to jump harder to reach a given height, and
so on. In calling to someone at a distance or in talking to a
deaf person, our verbal behavior is reinforced only when it
reaches a certain level of loudness. Tests of strength and other
competitive games supply examples of these differential
contingencies. When a heavy ball is thrown beyond a certain
mark, when a horizontal bar is cleared in vaulting or in
jumping, when a ball is batted over the fence (and when, as a
result, a record is broken or a match or game won),
differential reinforcement is at work. It may to some extent
change the topography of the behavior and produce "good
form," but it has an important effect upon the mere force with
which the behavior is executed.
We use differential reinforcement to shape and intensify the
behavior of others in what may be spoken of, as we shall see
in Chapter XX, as deliberate control. The effect may also be
wholly unintentional. The mother who complains that her
three-year-old child whines and cries for attention in an
annoying way may not realize that her own reinforcing
practices are responsible. If she is busy with other matters, she
is likely not to respond to a call or request made in a quiet tone
of voice. When the child raises his voice, she replies. This is
differential reinforcement. The average intensity of the child's
vocal behavior rises. When the mother has adapted to the new
level, again only the louder instances are reinforced. Further
differentiation in the direction of loud responses follows. The
child's voice may also

98

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

vary in intonation. What we call "whining" may be thought
of as speaking with a small admixture of crying. Such speech is
more likely to secure an effect and is therefore differentially
strengthened. In fact, what we call annoying behavior in general
is just that behavior which is especially effective in arousing
another person to action. Differential reinforcement supplied by
a preoccupied or negligent parent is very close to the
procedure we should adopt if we were given the task of
conditioning a child to be annoying.
THE MAINTENANCE OF BEHAVIOR
One reason the term "learning" is not equivalent to "operant
conditioning" is that traditionally it has been confined to the
process of learning how to do something. In trial-and-error
learning, for example, the organism learns how to get out of a
box or how to find its way through a maze. It is easy to see
why the acquisition of behavior should be- emphasized. Early
devices for the study of learning did not reveal the basic process
directly. The effect of operant reinforcement is most
conspicuous when there is a gross change in behavior. Such a
chance occurs when an organism learns how to make a
response which it did not or could not make before. A more
sensitive measure, however, enables us to deal with cases in
which the acquisition of behavior is of minor importance.
Operant conditioning continues to be effective even when
there is no further change which can be spoken of as
acquisition or even as improvement in skill. Behavior
continues to have consequences and these continue to be
important. If consequences are not forthcoming, extinction
occurs. When we come to consider the behavior of the
organism in all the complexity of its everyday life, we need to be
constantly alert to the prevailing reinforcements which
maintain its behavior. We may, indeed, have little interest in
how that behavior was first acquired. Our concern is only
with its present probability of occurrence, which can be
understood only through an examination of current
contingencies of reinforcement. This is an aspect of
reinforcement which is scarcely ever dealt with in classical
treatments of learning.

SHAPING AND MAINTAINING OPERANT BEHAVIOR

99

INTERMITTENT REINFORCEMENT
In general, behavior which acts upon the immediate
physical en-vironment is consistently reinforced. We orient
ourselves toward objects and approach, reach for, and seize
them with a stable repertoire of responses which have
uniform consequences arising from the optical and
mechanical properties of nature. It is possible, of course, to
disturb the uniformity. In a "house of mirrors" in an
amusement park, or in a room designed to supply misleading
cues to the vertical, well-established responses may fail to
have their usual effects. But the fact that such conditions are
so unusual as to have commercial value testifies to the
stability of the everyday world.
A large part of behavior, however, is reinforced only
intermittently. A given consequence may depend upon a series
of events which _are not easily predicted. We do not always
win at cards or dice, because the contingencies are so
remotely determined that we call them "chance." We do not
always find good ice or snow when we go skating or skiing.
Contingencies which require the participation of people are
especially likely to be uncertain. We do not always get a
good meal in a particular restaurant because cooks are not
always predictable. We do not always get an answer when
we telephone a friend because the friend is not always at
home. We do not always get a pen by reaching into our
pocket because we have not always put it there. The
reinforcements characteristic of industry and education are
almost always intermittent because it is not feasible to
control behavior by reinforcing every response.
As might be expected, behavior which is reinforced only
intermittently often shows an intermediate frequency of
occurrence, but laboratory studies of various schedules have
revealed some surprising complexities. Usually such behavior
is remarkably stable and shows great resistance to extinction.
An experiment has already been mentioned in which more
than 10,000 responses appeared in the extinction curve of a
pigeon which had been reinforced on a special schedule.
Nothing of the sort is ever obtained after continuous
reinforcement. Since this is a technique for "getting more
responses out of an organism" in return for a given number
of reinforcements.

100

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

it is widely used. Wages are paid in special ways and betting
and gambling devices are designed to "pay off" on special
schedules because of the relatively large return on the
reinforcement in such a case. Approval, affection, and other
personal favors are frequently intermittent, not only because
the person supplying the reinforcement may behave in
different ways at different times, but precisely because he
may have found that such a schedule yields a more stable,
persistent, and profitable return.
It is important to distinguish between schedules which are
arranged by a system outside the organism and those which
are controlled by the behavior itself. An example of the first
is a schedule of reinforcement which is determined by a clock
—as when we reinforce a pigeon every five minutes,
allowing all intervening responses to go unreinforced. An
example of the second is a schedule in which a response is
reinforced after a certain number of responses have been
emitted— as when we reinforce every fiftieth response the
pigeon makes. The cases are similar in the sense that we
reinforce intermittently in both, but subtle differences in the
contingencies lead to very different results, often of great
practical significance.
Interval reinforcement. If we reinforce behavior at regular
intervals, an organism such as a rat or pigeon will adjust with
a nearly constant rate of responding, determined by the
frequency of reinforcement. If we reinforce it every minute,
the animal responds rapidly; if every five minutes, much
more slowly. A similar effect upon probability of response is
characteristic of human behavior. How often we call a given
number on the telephone will depend, other things being
equal, upon how often we get an answer. If two agencies
supply the same service, we are more likely to call the one
which answers more often. We are less likely to see friends or
acquaintances with whom we only occasionally have a good
time, and we are less likely to write to a correspondent who
seldom answers. The experimental results are precise
enough to suggest that in general the organism gives back a
certain number of responses for each response reinforced.
We shall see, however, that the results of schedules of
reinforcement are not always reducible to a simple equating
of input with output.
Since behavior which appears under interval reinforcement
is espe-

SHAPING AND MAINTAINING OPERANT BEHAVIOR

101

cially stable, it is useful in studying other variables and
conditions. The size or amount of each reinforcement affects
the rate—more responses appearing in return for a larger
reinforcement. Different kinds of reinforcers also yield different
rates, and these may be used to rank reinforcers in the order of
their effectiveness. The rate varies with the immediacy of the
reinforcement: a slight delay between response and the receipt
of the reinforcer means a lower over-all rate. Other variables
which have been studied under interval reinforcement will be
discussed in later chapters. They include the degree of
deprivation and the presence or absence of certain emotional
circumstances.
Optimal schedules of reinforcement are often of great
practical importance. They are often discussed in connection
with other vari-ables which affect the rate. Reinforcing a man
with fifty dollars at one time may not be so effective as
reinforcing him with five dollars at ten different times during
the same period. This is especially the case with primitive
people where conditioned reinforcers have not been
established to bridge the temporal span between a response
and its ultimate consequence. There are also many subtle
interactions between schedules of reinforcement and levels of
motivation, immediacy of reinforcement, and so on.
If behavior continues to be reinforced at fixed intervals,
another process intervenes. Since responses are never
reinforced just after reinforcement, a change, to be described
in Chapter VII, eventually takes place in which the rate of
responding is low for a short time after each reinforcement.
The rate rises again when an interval of time has elapsed
which the organism presumably cannot distinguish from the
interval at which it is reinforced. These changes in rate are not
characteristic of the effect of wages in industry, which
would otherwise appear to be an example of a fixed-interval
schedule. The discrepancy is explained by the fact that other
reinforcing systems are used to maintain a given level of
work, as we shall see in Chapter XXV. Docking a man for
time absent guarantees his presence each day by establishing
a time-card entry as a conditioned reinforcer. The aversive
reinforcement (Chapter XI) supplied by a supervisor or boss is,
however, the principal supplement to a fixed-interval wage.
A low probability of response just after reinforcement is
eliminated

102

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

with what is called variable-interval reinforcement. Instead
of reinforcing a response every five minutes, for example,
we reinforce every five minutes on the average, where the
intervening interval may be as short as a few seconds or as
long as, say, ten minutes. Reinforcement occasionally occurs
just after the organism has been reinforced, and the organism
therefore continues to respond at that time. Its performance
under such a schedule is remarkably stable and uniform.
Pigeons reinforced with food with a variable interval
averaging five minutes between reinforcements have been
observed to respond for as long as fifteen hours at a rate of
from two to three responses per second without pausing
longer than fifteen or twenty seconds during the whole
period. It is usually very difficult to extinguish a response
after such a schedule. Many sorts of social or personal
reinforcement are supplied on what is essentially a variableinterval basis, and extraordinarily persistent behavior is
sometimes set up.
Ratio reinforcement. An entirely different result is
obtained when the schedule, of reinforcement depends upon
the behavior of the organism itself—when, for example, we
reinforce every fiftieth response. This is reinforcement at a
"fixed ratio"—the ratio of reinforced to unreinforced
responses. It is a common schedule in education, where the
student is reinforced for completing a project or a paper or
some other specific amount of work. It is essentially the
basis of professional pay and of selling on commission. In
industry it is known as piecework pay. It is a system of
reinforcement which naturally recommends itself to
employers because the cost of the labor required to produce
a given result can be calculated in advance.
Fixed-ratio reinforcement generates a very high rate of
response provided the ratio is not too high. This should
follow from the input-output relation alone. Any slight
increase in rate increases the frequency of reinforcement
with the result that the rate should rise still further. If no
other factor intervened, the rate should reach the highest
possible value. A limiting factor, which makes itself felt in
industry, is simple fatigue. The high rate of responding and
the long hours of work generated by this schedule can be
dangerous to health. This is the main reason why piecework
pay is usually strenuously opposed by organized labor.

SHAPING AND MAINTAINING OPERANT BEHAVIOR

103

Another objection to this type of schedule is based upon
the possibility that as the rate rises, the reinforcing agency
will move to a larger ratio. In the laboratory, after first
reinforcing every tenth response and then every fiftieth, we
may find it possible to reinforce only every hundredth,
although we could not have used this ratio in the beginning.
In industry, the employee whose productivity has increased
as the result of a piecework schedule may receive so large a
weekly wage that the employer feels justified in increasing
the number of units of work required for a given unit of pay.
Under ratios of reinforcement which can be sustained, the
behavior eventually shows a very low probability just after
reinforcement, as it does in the case of fixed-interval
reinforcement. The effect is marked under high fixed ratios
because the organism always has "a long way to go" before
the next reinforcement. Wherever a piecework schedule is
used—in industry, education, salesmanship, or the professions
—low morale or low interest is most often observed just
after a unit of work has been completed. When responding
begins, the situation is improved by each response and the
more the organism responds, the better the chances of
reinforcement become. The result is a smooth gradient of
acceleration as the organism responds more and more
rapidly. The condition eventually prevailing under high
fixed-ratio reinforcement is not an efficient over-all mode of
responding. It makes relatively poor use of the available
time, and the higher rates of responding may be especially
fatiguing.
The laboratory study of ratio reinforcement has shown
that for a given organism and a given measure of
reinforcement there is a limiting ratio beyond which
behavior cannot be sustained. The result of exceeding this
ratio is an extreme degree of extinction of the sort which we
call abulia (Chapter V). Long periods of inactivity begin to
appear between separate ratio runs. This is not physical
fatigue, as we may easily show by shifting to another
schedule. It is often called "mental" fatigue, but this
designation adds nothing to the observed fact that beyond a
certain high ratio of reinforcement the organism simply has
no behavior available. In both the laboratory study of ratio
reinforcement and its practical application in everyday life,
the first signs of strain imposed by too high a ratio are seen
in these

104

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

breaks. Before a pigeon stops altogether—in complete
"abulia"—it will often not respond for a long time after
reinforcement. In the same way, the student who has
finished a term paper, perhaps in a burst of speed at the end
of the gradient, finds it difficult to start work on a new
assignment.
Exhaustion can occur under ratio reinforcement because
there is no self-regulating mechanism. In interval
reinforcement, on the other hand, any tendency toward
extinction is opposed by the fact that when the rate declines,
the next reinforcement is received in return for fewer
responses. The variable-interval schedule is also selfprotecting: an organism will stabilize its behavior at a given
rate under any length of interval.
We get rid of the pauses after reinforcement on a fixedratio schedule by adopting essentially the same practice as
in variable-interval reinforcement: we simply vary the ratios
over a considerable range around some mean value.
Successive responses may be reinforced or many hundreds of
unreinforced responses may intervene. The probability of
reinforcement at any moment remains essentially constant and
the organism adjusts by holding to a constant rate. This
"variable-ratio reinforcement" is much more powerful than a
fixed-ratio scedule with the same mean number of responses. A
pigeon may respond as rapidly as five times per second and
maintain this rate for many hours.
The efficacy of such schedules in generating high rates has
long been known to the proprietors of gambling
establishments. Slot machines, roulette wheels, dice cages,
horse races, and so on pay off on a schedule of variable-ratio
reinforcement. Each device has its own auxiliary
reinforcements, but the schedule is the important characteristic.
Winning depends upon placing a bet and in the long run upon
the number of bets placed, but no particular payoff can be
predicted. The ratio is varied by any one of several "random"
systems. The pathological gambler exemplifies the result.
Like the pigeon with its five responses per second for many
hours, he is the victim of an unpredictable contingency of
reinforcement. The long-term net gain or loss is almost
irrelevant in accounting for the effectiveness of this schedule.

SHAPING AND MAINTAINING OPERANT BEHAVIOR

105

A combined schedule. It is fairly easy to combine ratio and
interval reinforcement in a laboratory experiment so that
reinforcement is determined both by the passage of time and
by the number of unrein-forced responses emitted. In such a
case, if the organism is responding rapidly, it responds many
times before being reinforced, but if it is responding slowly,
only a few responses occur before the next reinforcement.
Such a schedule resembles either interval or ratio
reinforcement, depending upon the values chosen in the
combination, but there is some evidence that there is a
middle ground in which neither schedule predominates and
that the resulting behavior is unstable. Although this combined
schedule may seem quite arbitrary, it is exemplified by many
social situations where, as we shall see in Chapter XIX, the
reinforcing agent may be affected by the level of the behavior
reinforced.
We can reinforce an organism only when responses are
occurring at a specified rate. If we reinforce only when, say, the
four preceding responses have occurred within two seconds, we
generate a very high rate. This is maintained even when we
reinforce only at varying intervals with a fairly long mean
interval. The rates exceed those which prevail under a
variable-ratio schedule for the same net rate of
reinforcement. Reinforcing a low rate of responding at
variable intervals has the opposite effect of generating a
sustained low rate. These studies have yielded many facts,
too detailed to be discussed here, which explain why a given
schedule of reinforcement has the effect it has. The effects of
a schedule are due to the contingencies which prevail at the
moment of reinforcement under it. Such schedules are, in other
words, simply rather inaccurate ways of reinforcing rates of
responding. They are often the most convenient way of doing
this, and this may explain their widespread use in the practical
control of behavior. But with proper instrumentation it
should be possible to improve upon established practices in
all these fields. Thus gambling devices could be
"improved"—from the point of view of the proprietor—by
introducing devices which would pay off on a variable-interval
basis, but only when the rate of play is exceptionally high.
The device would need to be more complex than the slot
machine or roulette/wheel but would undoubtedly be more
effective in

106 THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR
inducing play. Schedules of pay in industry, salesmanship,
and the professions, and the use of bonuses, incentive wages,
and so on, could also be improved from the point of view of
generating maximal productivity.
Whether these improvements should be permitted is a
matter to be discussed later. A schedule of reinforcement not
only increases productivity, it also increases the interest,
morale, and happiness of the worker. Any decision concerning a
choice of schedules is complicated by this fact. In any event,
we can act intelligently in this area only if we are in
possession of clear-cut information regarding the nature and
effect of the devices responsible for the maintenance of
behavior in strength. We have much to gain from a close
study of the results of experimental analyses.

CHAPTER VII

OPERANT DISCRIMINATION
DISCRIMINATIVE STMULI
Operant conditioning may be described
without mentioning any stimulus which acts before
the response is made. In reinforcing neck-stretching
in the pigeon it was necessary to wait for the
stretching to occur; we did not elicit it. When a baby
puts his hand to his mouth, the movement may be
reinforced by the contact of hand and mouth, but we
cannot find any stimulus which elicits the
movement and which is present every time it
occurs. Stimuli are always acting upon an organism,
but their functional connection with oper-ant
behavior is not like that in the reflex. Operant
behavior, in short, is emitted, rather than elicited. It
must have this property if the notion of probability
of response is to make sense.
Most operant behavior, however, acquires
important connections with the surrounding world.
We may show how it does so in our pigeon
experiment by reinforcing neck-stretching when a
signal light is on and allowing it to be extinguished
when the light is off. Eventually stretching occurs
only when the light is on. We can then demonstrate
a stimulus-response connection which is roughly
comparable to a conditioned or unconditioned
reflex: the appearance of the light will be quickly
followed by an upward movement of the
107

108

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

head. But the relation is fundamentally quite different. It has
a different history and different current properties. We
describe the contingency by saying that a stimulus (the light)
is the occasion upon which a response (stretching the neck)
is followed by reinforcement (with food). We must specify
all three terms. The effect upon the pigeon is that eventually
the response is more likely to occur when the light is on.
The process through which this comes about is called
discrimination. Its importance in a theoretical analysis, as
well as in the practical control of behavior, is obvious: when
a discrimination has been established, we may alter the
probability of a response instantly by presenting or
removing the discriminative stimulus.
Operant behavior almost necessarily comes under this
kind of stimulus control, since only a few responses are
automatically reinforced by the organism's own body
without respect to external circumstances. Reinforcement
achieved by adjusting to a given environment almost always
requires the sort of physical contact which we call
stimulation. The environmental control has an obvious
biological significance. If all behavior were equally likely to
occur on all occasions, the result would be chaotic. It is
obviously advantageous that a response occur only when it
is likely to be reinforced.
The three-term contingencies which produce
discriminative operants are of many kinds. We develop the
behavior with which we adjust to the spatial world because
visual stimulation from an object is the occasion upon
which certain responses of walking, reaching, and so on
lead to particular tactual consequences. The visual field is
the occasion for effective manipulatory action. The
contingencies responsible for the behavior are generated by
the relations between visual and tactual stimulation
characteristic of physical objects. Other connections
between the properties of objects supply other sorts of
contingencies which lead to similar changes in behavior.
For example, in an orchard in which red apples are sweet
and all others sour, the behavior of picking and eating
comes to be controlled by the redness of the stimulus.
The social environment contains vast numbers of such
contingencies. A smile is an occasion upon which social
approach will meet with approval. A frown is an occasion
upon which the same approach

OPERANT DISCRIMINATION

109

will not meet with approval. Insofar as this is generally true,
approach comes to depend to some extent upon the facial
expression of the person approached. We use this fact when by
smiling or frowning we control to some extent the behavior
of those approaching us. The ringing of a telephone is an
occasion upon which answering will be followed by hearing a
voice. The young child may pick up and speak into the
telephone at any time, but eventually he will do so only
when it has been ringing. The verbal stimulus "Come to
dinner" is an occasion upon which going to a table and
sitting down is usually reinforced with food. The stimulus
comes to be effective in increasing the probability of that
behavior and is produced by the speaker because it does so.
Bells, whistles, and traffic signals are other obvious occasions
upon which certain actions are generally followed by certain
consequences.
Verbal behavior fits the pattern of the three-term contingency
and supplies many illuminating examples. We learn to name
objects by acquiring an enormous repertoire of responses each
of which is appropriate to a given occasion. A chair is the
occasion upon which the response "chair" is likely to be
reinforced, a cat is the occasion upon which the response "cat"
is likely to be reinforced, and so on. When we read aloud, we
respond to a series of visual stimuli with a series of
corresponding vocal responses. The three-term contingency is
evident in teaching a child to read, when a given response is
reinforced with "right" or "wrong" according to the presence
or absence of the appropriate visual stimulus.
Many verbal responses are under the control of verbal
discrimination stimuli. In memorizing the multiplication table,
for example, the stimulus "9 X 9" is the occasion upon
which the response "81" is appropriately reinforced, either
by an instructor or by the successful outcome of a
calculation. Historical "facts" and many other types of
information fit the same formula. When the student writes
an examination, he emits, insofar as it has become part of his
repertoire, the behavior which is reinforced upon the special
occasion established by the examination question.
We use operant discrimination in two ways. In the first
place, stimuli which have already become discriminative are
manipulated in

110

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

order to change probabilities. We do this explicitly and
almost con- tinuously when we direct constructive work,
control the behavior of children, issue orders, and so on. We
do it more subtly when we arrange stimuli whose
effectiveness has not been specifically established for such
purposes. In displaying merchandise in a large store the
behavior of the customer is controlled through existing
discriminative operants. The purchase of certain types of
merchandise may be assumed to be strongly determined by
conditions which commonly bring customers to the store. It
is a mistake to exhibit this merchandise in the front of the
store, since the customer will then buy and leave. Instead,
goods are displayed which are more likely to be purchased
"on the spur of the moment" rather than as the result of
deprivations sufficient to bring the customer into the store.
The display serves as a "reminder" in the sense of making
the occasion optimal for the emission of weak behavior.
In the second place, we may set up a discrimination in
order to make sure that a future stimulus will have a given
effect when it appears. Education is largely a matter of
establishing such discriminative repertoires, as we shall see
in Chapter XXVI. We set up contingencies which generate
behavior as the result of which children will look before
crossing streets, will say "Thank you" upon the proper
occasions, will give correct answers to questions about
historical events, will operate machines in the proper
manner, will buy books, attend concerts, plays, and moving
pictures identified in certain ways, and so on.
VOLUNTARY AND INVOLUNTARY BEHAVIOR
The relation between the discriminative operant and its
controlling stimulus is very different from elicitation.
Stimulus and response occur in the same order as in the
reflex, but this does not warrant the inclusion of both types
in a single "stimulus-response" formula. The discriminative
stimulus does not elicit a response, it simply alters a
probability of occurrence. The relation is flexible and
continuously graded. The response follows the stimulus in a
more leisurely fashion, and it may be intense or feeble almost
without respect to the intensity

OPERANT DISCRIMINATION

111

of the stimulus. This difference is at the root of the classical
distinction between voluntary and involuntary behavior.
In the early history of the reflex, an effort was made to
distinguish between reflexes and the rest of the behavior of
the organism. One difference frequently urged was that a
reflex was innate, but the principle of conditioning made
such a distinction trivial. It was also said that reflexes were
different because they were unconscious. This did not mean
that the individual could not report upon his own reflex
behavior, but that the behavior made its appearance whether
he could do so or not. Reflex action might take place when a
man was asleep or otherwise "unconscious." As we shall see
in Chapter XVII, this too is no longer considered a valid
difference; behavior which is clearly not reflex may occur
under such circumstances. A third classical distinction held
that reflexes were not only innate and unconscious, but
"involuntary." They were not "willed." The evidence was
not so much that they could not be willed as that they could
not be willed against. A certain part of the behavior of the
organism cannot, so to speak, be helped. We may not be able
to keep from winking when something moves close to our
eyes. We may not be able to help flinching at gunfire or
salivating at the taste of a lemon or (through a conditioned
reflex) at the sight of a lemon. Before the discovery of the
reflex such behavior was reconciled with a scheme of inner
causation by postulating separate causes. It was attributed to
seditious selves or foreign spirits temporarily invading the
body. The involuntary sneeze, for example, revealed the
presence of the Devil. (We still take the precaution of saying
"God bless you" when someone sneezes.) With the advent of
the notion of the reflex the issue of controllability became
less crucial.
In the present analysis we cannot distinguish between
involuntary and voluntary behavior by raising the issue of
who is in control. It does not matter whether behavior is due
to a willing individual or a psychic usurper if we dismiss all
inner agents of whatever sort. Nor can we make the
distinction on the basis of control or lack of control, since we
assume that no behavior is free. If we have no reason to
distinguish between being able to do something and doing
it, such expressions as "not being able to do something" or
"not being able to

112

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

help doing something" must be interpreted in some other way.
When all relevant variables have been arranged, an organism
will or will not respond. If it does not, it cannot. If it can, it
will. To ask whether someone can turn a handspring is
merely to ask whether there are circumstances under which
he will do so. A man who can avoid flinching at gunfire is a
man who will not flinch under certain circumstances. A man
who can hold still while a dentist works on his teeth is one
who holds still upon certain occasions.
The distinction between voluntary and involuntary
behavior is a matter of the kind of control. It corresponds to
the distinction between eliciting and discriminative stimuli.
The eliciting stimulus appears to be more coercive. Its causal
connection with behavior is relatively simple and easily
observed. This may explain why it was discovered first. The
discriminative stimulus, on the other hand, shares its control
with other variables, so that the inevitability of its effect
cannot be easily demonstrated. But when all relevant variables
have been taken into account, it is not difficult to guarantee
the result—to force the discriminative operant as inexorably as
the eliciting stimulus forces its response. If the manner in
which this is done and the quantitative properties of the
resulting relation warrant such a distinction, we may say that
voluntary behavior is operant and involuntary behavior
reflex.
It is natural that the "will" as an inner explanation of
behavior should have survived longer in the study of operant
behavior, where the control exercised by the environment is
more subtle and indirect. In the case of the operation we call
reinforcement, for example, the current strength of behavior is
due to events which have occurred in the past history of the
organism—events which are not observed at the moment
their effect is felt. Deprivation is a relevant variable, but one
which has a history of which we may have little or no
information. When a discriminative stimulus has an effect
upon the probability of a response, we see that the present
environment is indeed relevant, but it is not easy to prove
the inevitability of the control without an adequate account of
the history of reinforcement and deprivation.
Consider, for example, a hungry guest who hears his host
say,

OPERANT DISCRIMINATION

113

"Won't you come to dinner?" (We assume that the guest has
undergone the elaborate conditioning responsible for the
behavior described as "knowing English.") As the result of
respondent conditioning, this verbal stimulus leads to a certain
amount of "involuntary" secretion of saliva and other gastric
juices and perhaps contraction of the smooth muscles in the
walls of the stomach and intestines. It may also induce the
guest to approach and sit down at the table, but this behavior
is certainly of another sort. It appears to be less sharply
determined, and we predict it less confidently. Both the
salivary reflex and the operant response occur because they
have usually been reinforced with food, but this history lies in
the past, much of it in the remote past. In the absence of an
appropriate state of deprivation they may not occur; the guest
may instead reply, "Thank you, I'm not hungry." But even if
the history of reinforcement and deprivation is satisfactory,
the operant responses may be displaced by other behavior
involving the same musculature. If our guest has been offended
by undue delay in the preparation of the meal, for example, he
may take revenge by creating a further delay—perhaps by
asking to wash his hands and remaining out of the room a
long time. The behavior has been acquired because it has
been reinforced by its damaging effect upon other persons—
because the guest has "learned how to annoy people." Before
we can predict that he will come to the table as surely as we
predict that he will salivate, we must have information about
all relevant variables—not only those which increase the
probability of the response but also those which increase the
probability of competing responses. Since we ordinarily lack
anything like adequate knowledge of all these variables, it is
simpler to assume that the behavior is determined by the
guest's will—that he will come if he wants to and wills to do
so. But the assumption is of neither theoretical nor practical
value, for we still have to predict the behavior of the "will."
The inner explanation is no short cut to the information we
need. If many variables are important, many variables must
be studied.
The distinction between voluntary and involuntary
behavior, or operant and reflex behavior, parallels another
distinction. Reflexes are primarily concerned, as we have
seen, with the internal economy

114

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

of the organism, where glands and smooth muscles are most
important. Reflexes employing the striped muscles are chiefly
involved in maintaining posture and in other responses to the
more stable properties of the surrounding world. This is the
only area in which well-defined responses are effective
enough to be acquired as part of the genetic equipment of the
organism. Operant behavior, on the other hand, is largely
concerned with that part of the environment in which the
conditions for effective action are quite unstable and where
a genetic or "instinctive" endowment is much less probable,
if not actually impossible.
Reflex behavior is extended through respondent
conditioning and apparently cannot be conditioned according
to the operant pattern. Glands and smooth muscles do not
naturally produce the kinds of consequences involved in
operant reinforcement, and when we arrange such
consequences experimentally, operant conditioning does not
take place. We may reinforce a man with food whenever he
"turns red," but we cannot in this way condition him to blush
"voluntarily." The behavior of blushing, like that of blanching
or secreting tears, saliva, sweat, and so on cannot be brought
directly under the control of operant reinforcement. If some
technique could be worked out to achieve this result, it would
be possible to train a child to control his emotions as readily as
he controls the positions of his hands.
A result which resembles the voluntary control of glands or
smooth muscles is achieved when operant behavior creates
appropriate stimuli. If it is not possible to alter the rate of the
pulse directly through operant reinforcement, other behavior
—violent exercise, for example—can generate a condition in
which the pulse rate changes. If we reinforce a certain critical
rate, we may in fact, though inadvertently, simply reinforce
operant behavior which produces it. This effect appears to be
the explanation of apparent exceptions to the rule. Cases
have been reported in which a man could raise the hair on
his arm "voluntarily." Other subjects have been able to slow
their pulse on command. But there is reasonable evidence for
supposing that in every case an intervening step occurs and
that the response of the gland or smooth muscle itself is not an
operant. Other examples

OPERANT DISCRIMINATION

115

in which an operant and a reflex are chained together in this
way will be described in Chapter XV.
It is not so easy to determine whether we can condition
purely reflex responses in striped muscles through operant
reinforcement. The difficulty is that an operant response may
arise which simply imitates the reflex. One may sneeze, for
example, not only because of the pepper but because of
special social consequences—"He only does it to annoy,
because he knows it teases." Whether the facsimile sneeze
resembles the reflex response in every particular is hard to say,
but it probably does not. In any case, the controlling
variables are sufficiently different to warrant a distinction.
The little boy who sneezes to annoy is unmasked when we set
up conditions for incompatible operant behavior. If we offer
him candy and the sneezing stops, we may be pretty sure that
it was not reflex. We need not say that the sneezing must have
been voluntary "because he could stop it when he wanted to."
A more acceptable translation reads, "He stopped sneezing
when variables were introduced which strengthened competing
behavior."
The distinction between voluntary and involuntary
behavior is further complicated by the fact that the two
muscular systems sometimes overlap. The sphincters of the
eliminative system and the muscles of the eyelid take part in
certain well-known reflexes. In the young child the reflex
control sometimes acts alone, but operant behavior is later
acquired which may become powerful enough to oppose
reflex action. Ordinarily, breathing is reflex, but we
"voluntarily" stop breathing under suitable conditions of
operant reinforcement—for example, to win a bet or to escape
the aversive stimulation of water in the nose when we dive.
How long we stop will depend upon the strength of the
breathing reflexes, which become more and more powerful as
carbon dioxide accumulates in the blood. Eventually a point
is reached at which we "cannot help breathing."
The distinction between voluntary and involuntary behavior
bears upon our changing concept of personal responsibility.
We do not hold people responsible for their reflexes—for
example, for coughing in church. We hold them responsible
for their operant behavior— for example, for whispering in
church or remaining in church while

116

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

coughing. But there are variables which are responsible for
whispering as well as for coughing, and these may be just as
inexorable. When we recognize this, we are likely to drop the
notion of responsibility altogether and with it the doctrine of
free will as an inner causal agent. This may make a great
difference in our practices. The doctrine of personal
responsibility is associated with certain techniques of
controlling behavior—techniques which generate "a sense of
responsibility" or point out "an obligation to society." These
techniques are relatively ill-adapted to their purpose. Those
who suffer are the first to speak out for the inevitability of
their behavior. The alcoholic insists that he can't help
drinking and the "victim of a bad temper" that he can't help
kicking the cat or speaking his mind. We have every reason
to agree. But we can improve our understanding of human
behavior and greatly strengthen our control by designing
alternative practices which recognize the importance of
reinforcement as well as other variables of which behavior
is a function.
DISCRIMINATIVE REPERTOIRES
We have seen that any unit of operant behavior is to a
certain extent artificial. Behavior is the coherent, continuous
activity of an integral organism. Although it may be analyzed
into parts for theoretical or practical purposes, we need to
recognize its continuous nature in order to solve certain
common problems. Discriminative behavior offers many
examples. In the behavior of reaching toward and touching a
spot in the visual field, each position which the spot may
occupy requires a particular combination of reaching and
touching movements. Each position becomes the
distinguishing property of a discriminative stimulus which
raises the probability of the appropriate response. Eventually a
spot in any position evokes the movement which achieves
contact with it. At the very edges of the field the behavior
may be defective, and unusual cases may need special
conditioning—for example, reaching for an object seen in a
mirror or from an unusual posture—but in the central area all
positions of the spot comprise a continuous field and all
possible combinations of movements leading to contact
form a corresponding field. The

OPERANT DISCRIMINATION

117

behavior is acquired upon specific occasions when specific
responses toward specific locations are reinforced, but the
organism almost inevitably acquires a coherent repertoire
which can be described without referring to the punctate
origins of the two fields.
If we wish to specify the smallest possible unit of
correspondence between stimulus and response, we use the
dimensions in which the two fields are described. The
correspondence is between points. But in many repertoires
the minimal units fall considerably short of points in
continuous fields. The stimuli and responses may not
compose fields. When we learn the names of a large number
of people, we do not expect either the visual patterns which
the people present or their names to form continuous fields.
The repertoire remains a collection of discrete units. Even
when stimuli and responses can be described as fields, the
behavior may not be developed to that point. In several of
the discriminative repertoires now to be considered, the
functional unit is much smaller than the stimulus or
response which appears upon any given occasion and with
which we characteristically deal, but it is by no means
always so small as to be expressed as an instance of the
correspondence between fields.
Drawing from copy. Our behavior in response to the
spatial field in which we live is so familiar that we are likely
to forget how it is acquired. There are certain less familiar
forms of behavior in which the origin of a discriminative
repertoire can sometimes be clearly traced. In drawing "from
copy"—or, less obviously, from an object— our behavior is
the product of a set of three-term contingencies. A given
line in the material to be copied is the occasion upon which
certain movements with pencil and paper produce a similar
line. All such lines and all such movements comprise fields,
but the behavior may not reach a condition in which it can
be dealt with as a field. This is easily seen in the behavior of
the young child learning to draw. A small number of
standardized responses are evoked by the highly complex
stimulus field. The behavior of the skilled copyist is
composed of a much larger number of responses and may
seem as "natural" as our responses to spatial positions. It
does not reach the point at which it comprises a continuous
field if a given line in the copy is not reproduced exactly but
rather with a characteristic

118

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

response in the "individual style" of the artist. An extreme
case, in which behavior is divided into clearly identifiable
discrete units even though the stimulus has the
characteristics of a field, is the behavior of the electrical
engineer who "draws a picture" of a radio set using perhaps
twenty or thirty unit responses.
There are great individual differences in the ability to
draw from copy. The contingencies responsible for the
behavior are by no means so universal as those responsible
for spatial behavior with respect to the visual field, and very
different amounts of instruction are received by different
individuals. Moreover, a small difference in early instruction
may make a big difference in the eventual result. The child
who develops at an early age a repertoire with which he
successfully copies drawings and objects is likely to
continue to use it and to receive further differential
reinforcement. The special training of the artist includes
many highly, sensitive differential contingencies, supplied
by a teacher or automatically by the artist himself as he
becomes "discriminating." A man who cannot draw well is
likely to be puzzled by one who can. He cannot see "how it
is done." By no "effort of will" can he produce a comparable
achievement. The basic minimal repertoire is simply lacking.
It can be established only through discriminative
reinforcement. The behavior is under the control of the
copy, not of the artist, and until the copy has been put into
control through differential reinforcement based upon it as a
discriminative stimulus, the behavior will not occur.
Singing or playing by ear. Drawing from copy is like
responding to the spatial world insofar as both stimuli and
responses approach continuous fields in the same way in
both cases. In playing an instrument or singing a tune "by
ear," however, spatial dimensions are lacking. Here
appropriate repertoires are set up by similar three-term
contingencies. A tone is the occasion upon which certain
complex behavior in the vocal apparatus will be reinforced
by generating a matching tone. The reinforcement is either
automatic, depending upon previous conditioning of the
singer with respect to good matches, or supplied by someone
—an instructor, for example— whose behavior also reflects
goodness of match. Such a repertoire may also include
responses to intervals, each heard interval being the

OPERANT DISCRIMINATION

119

occasion upon which a complex response generating a
corresponding interval is reinforced. Melodies, harmonic
progressions, and so on, may form the bases for similar
repertoires. The same kind of relationships may govern the
playing of a musical instrument, where the topography of
the behavior which generates the tones or patterns is entirely
different.
The ultimate unit in singing or playing by ear may stop at
the level of the half-tone scale. Both stimuli and responses
usually show this "grain." A singer with poor pitch is one
whose response system has a poorly defined grain which
does not match the stimulus system. On the other hand, a
singer with good pitch may correctly sing a melody which is
itself defective. Here the response repertoire is in better
focus than the stimulus. The half-tone scale is not, of course,
a natural limit. The successful vocal mimic has a repertoire
which approaches a continuous field and which permits him
to duplicate nonmusical sounds. The successful imitation of
bird song or of the noise of machines requires this sort of
fine-grained repertoire.
We easily lose sight of the conditioning required to
develop such behavior. The individual who cannot mimic an
auditory pattern or who cannot sing or play by ear is likely
to be puzzled by one who can. He finds it quite impossible
to sing a matching pitch or to hum a corresponding tune or
to imitate the noise of a locomotive, and he has no
conception of how the successful mimic does so. He cannot
be a successful mimic by any "act of will." The difference
lies in the histories of reinforcement. If the repertoire with
which one reproduces a melody has never been established, it
will not be brought into play by the appropriate
circumstances.
Imitation. It is only a short step from these discriminative
repertoires to the field of imitation. So far as we know,
imitative behavior does not arise because of any inherent
reflex mechanism. Such a mechanism would require that
the stimulus generated by a given pattern of behavior in
another organism elicit a series of responses having the
same pattern—for example, the visual stimulus of a
running dog would elicit running in another dog. This
would be an extremely complex mechanism and, in spite of
a strong belief to the contrary, it seems not to exist.
Imitation develops in the history of

120

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

the individual as the result of discriminative reinforcements
showing our same three-term contingency. The visual
stimulation of someone waving a hand is the occasion upon
which waving a hand will probably receive reinforcement.
The auditory stimulus "Da-Da" is the occasion upon which
the complicated verbal response which produces a matching
auditory pattern is reinforced by the delighted parent. We
see this sort of conditioning taking place in everyday life,
and we can also set it up in the laboratory. For example, we
can condition a pigeon to execute any one of several acts
according to whether another pigeon is executing that
particular act. When the imitatee is pecking a key in a
certain position, the imitator pecks a corresponding key.
When the imitatee pecks a key in a different position, the
imitator behaves accordingly. When the imitatee moves to the
opposite side of the cage, the imitator follows. Such imitative
behavior occurs only when specific discriminative
reinforcement has taken place. Pigeons do not appear to
imitate each other "naturally." The necessary three-term
contingency often occurs in nature, however. Thus, if a
pigeon is scratching in a leaf-strewn field, this is an occasion
upon which another pigeon is likely to be reinforced for
similar behavior. The human parallel is not far distant. When
we see people looking into a shop window, we are likely to
look, too—not because there is an instinct of imitation, but
because windows into which other people are looking are
likely to reinforce such behavior. So well developed is the
imitative repertoire of the average person that its origins are
forgotten, and it is easily accepted as an inherent part of his
behavior.
Imitative repertoires are often developed in relatively
discrete sets of responses. In learning to dance, a set of more
or less stereotyped responses is acquired by virtue of which
a step executed by the instructor is duplicated by the pupil.
The good dancer possesses a large imitative repertoire of
dance steps. When this repertoire is faulty, the imitation is
poor, and the novice finds it very difficult to match a
complicated step. In dancing, as in singing by ear, the
imitative ability of a good performer seems almost magical
to the untutored.
A good actor possesses an imitative repertoire of attitudes,
postures,

OPERANT DISCRIMINATION

121

and facial expressions which enable him to follow the
suggestions of a director or to duplicate behavior observed
in everyday life. The attempts of the unskilled actor may be
ludicrously wide of the mark because the essential
repertoire is lacking. Although imitative responses approach
a continuous field, that condition is probably never reached.
The duplication of the stimulus is often not precise, and the
"grain" of the repertoire with which even the good mimic
duplicates behavior may be apparent.
The similarity of stimulus and response in imitation has
no special function. We could easily establish behavior in
which the "imitator" does exactly the opposite of the
"imitatee." Our second pigeon could be conditioned to peck
always in a different position. Something of this sort is
involved in ballroom dancing where the behavior of
instructor and pupil in an "imitative" repertoire are not the
same. In ballroom dancing a step backward on the part of
the instructor is the occasion for a step forward on the part
of the pupil. This kind of inverse imitation can become as
smooth as behavior having the same properties, as the good
"follower" shows.
Other noncorresponding repertoires are found in the field
of sport. The behavior of the tennis player is controlled in
large measure by the behavior of his opponent, but the
corresponding patterns are not imitative in the usual sense.
There is, nevertheless, a three-term contingency: subtle
stimuli from the behavior of the opponent which are
correlated with a forthcoming placement of the ball are the
occasion for appropriate defensive behavior. The good
tennis player becomes extremely sensitive to this kind of
stimulation, and it is only because of this that he is able to
get into proper defensive positions. Fencing offers an
especially good example of the integrated behavior of two
individuals in which a response on the part of one
constitutes a discriminative stimulus for a different response
on the part of the other. The behavior may be as closely
integrated as that of two dancers executing the same steps at
the same time.
These inverse "imitative" repertoires cannot approach
continuous fields from which new instances will
automatically emerge. To some extent, skilled dancers may
improvise a dance in which one introduces a series of steps
and the other follows, just as a tennis player is

122

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

to some extent automatically in possession of the proper
reply to a new offensive maneuver, but the corresponding
fields which provide for the duplication of behavior in true
imitation are lacking.
ATTENTION
The control exerted by a discriminative stimulus is
traditionally dealt with under the heading of attention. This
concept reverses the direction of action by suggesting, not
that a stimulus controls the behavior of an observer, but that
the observer attends to the stimulus and thereby controls it.
Nevertheless, we sometimes recognize that the object
"catches or holds the attention" of the observer.
What we usually mean in such a case is that the observer
continues to look at the object. An animated billboard is
dangerous, for example, if it holds the attention of a
motorist too long. The behavior of the motorist in attending
to the sign is simply the behavior of looking at it rather than
at the road ahead of him. The behavior involves
conditioning, and, in particular, the special conditioning of
the discriminative operant. The variables are not always
obvious, but they can usually be detected. The fact that
people read billboards instead of looking at the surrounding
countryside shows how effectively reading is usually
reinforced—not only by billboards, but by stories, novels,
letters, and so on. Powerful reinforcements are arranged by
thousands of writers in every field of the written or printed
word. All of these stimuli have common typographical
properties, which induce the reading of new material. Some
reinforcement may also occur on the spot if the particular
material is "interesting." (We saw in Chapter VI that "taking
an interest" is only another way of expressing the
consequences of operant reinforcement.)
We may study this relation in a simple experiment. We
arrange to reinforce a pigeon when it pecks a key but only
when a small light above the key is flickering. The pigeon
forms a discrimination in which it responds to the key when
the light flickers and not otherwise. We also note that the
pigeon begins to watch the light. We might say that it is
attending to it or that it holds its attention. The behavior is
easily explained in terms of conditioned reinforcement.

OPERANT DISCRIMINATION

123

Looking toward the light is occasionally reinforced by seeing
the light flicker. The behavior is comparable to looking for
an object (Chapter V).
A steady orientation of the eyes is not the only possible
result. The behavior of a lookout in the dark or in a heavy
fog is an example of looking with orientation to the whole
visual field. The behavior of searching the field—or
responding to every part of it in some exploratory pattern—is
the behavior which is most often reinforced by the discovery
of important objects; hence it becomes strong. We can
usually observe that the behavior with which a child looks
for a misplaced toy is specifically conditioned. If some
patterns of looking are reinforced by the discovery of
objects more often than others, they emerge as standard
behavior. We may study this in the pigeon experiment by
arranging a series of lights, any one of which may begin to
flicker as a discriminative stimulus. The pigeon comes to
look at all the spots in a more or less random order. It may
be said to be "looking for the flickering spot," as in the
example discussed in Chapter V. If the light begins to flicker
while the pigeon is looking elsewhere, the flicker is seen at
one side of the visual field. The behavior of looking directly
toward the light is then optimally reinforced. We say that the
light "captures the undivided attention" of the bird.
But attention is more than looking at something or looking
at a class of things in succession. As everyone knows, we
may look at the center of a page while "attending to" details
at the edges. Attempts to account for this in terms of
"incipient eye movements" have failed; and in any case no
comparable orientation appears to occur in attending to
features of an auditory pattern. Thus, when we listen to a
phonograph recording of a symphony while attending
particularly to the clarinets, it is apparently not possible to
demonstrate any special orientation of the ear. But if
attention is not a form of behavior, it does not follow that it
is, therefore, outside the field of behavior. Attention is a
controlling relation—the relation between a response and a
discriminative stimulus. When someone is paying attention
he is under special control of a stimulus. We detect the
relation most readily when receptors are conspicuously

124

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

oriented, but this is not essential. An organism is attending
to a detail of a stimulus, whether or not its receptors are
oriented to produce the most clear-cut reception, if its
behavior is predominantly under the control of that detail.
When our subject describes an object at the edge of the page
even though we are sure he is not looking at it, or when he
tells us that the clarinets have fallen a beat behind the
violins, we need not demonstrate any spatial arrangement of
stimulus and response. It is enough to point to the special
controlling relation which makes such a response possible.
Similarly, in our experiment, we can say that the pigeon is
attending to the light, even though it is not looking at it, if it
consistently makes the correct discriminative reaction—if it
strikes the key when the light is flickering and does not
strike it when the light is still. It will probably look at the
light because the contingency responsible for the "attention"
is also responsible for the reinforcement of such behavior,
but it need not do so.
When we enjoin someone to pay particular attention to a
feature of the environment, our injunction is itself a
discriminative stimulus which supplements the stimulus
mentioned in controlling the behavior of the observer. The
observer is conditioned to look at or listen to a particular
stimulus when he is told to "pay attention" to it because
under such conditions he is reinforced for doing so. People
generally say "watch that man" only when that man is up to
something interesting. They generally say "Listen to the
conversation in the seat in back of you" only when
something interesting is being said.
Just as we may attend to an object without looking at it, so
we may look at an object without attending to it. We need
not conclude that we must then be looking with an inferior
sort of behavior in which the eyes are not correctly used.
The criterion is whether the stimulus is exerting any effect
upon our behavior. When we stare at someone without
noticing him, listen to a speech without attending to what is
said, or read a page "absent-mindedly," we are simply
failing to engage in some of the behavior which is normally
under the control of such stimuli.

OPERANT DISCRIMINATION

125

TEMPORAL RELATIONS BETWEEN
STIMULUS, RESPONSE, AND
REINFORCEMENT
The environment is so constructed that certain things tend
to happen together. The organism is so constructed that its
behavior changes when it comes into contact with such an
environment. There are three principal cases. (1) Certain
events—like the color and taste of ripe fruit—tend to occur
together. Respondent conditioning is the corresponding
effect upon behavior. (2) Certain activities of the organism
effect certain changes in the environment. Operant
conditioning is the corresponding effect upon behavior. (3)
Certain events are the occasions upon which certain actions
effect certain changes in the environment. Operant
discrimination is the corresponding effect upon behavior. As
a result of these processes, the organism which finds itself in
a novel environment eventually comes to behave in an
efficient way. The result could not be achieved by inherited
mechanisms because the environment it not sufficiently
constant from one generation to another.
It is also characteristic of the normal environment that
events occur together in certain temporal relations. A
stimulus may precede another stimulus by a given interval,
as when lightning precedes thunder. A response may
produce a consequence only after a given interval, as when
the ingestion of alcohol is followed by typical effects after a
certain delay. A response may achieve its consequence when
executed at a given time after the appearance of a
discriminative stimulus, as when a ball can be hit only by
swinging at it after it has come within reach and before it
goes out of reach.
The first two of these characteristics raise no special
problem. The effect of an interval of time between the stimuli
in respondent conditioning is easily stated. If we give food
to an organism ten seconds after a neutral stimulus has been
presented, the process of conditioning follows essentially the
usual pattern: the dog salivates to the previously neutral
stimulus. But eventually a temporal discrimination is
established. The dog does not salivate when the conditioned
stimulus is first presented but only after an interval has
elapsed which gradually approaches the interval after which
the unconditioned

126

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

stimulus usually appears. We may deal with this result
simply by defining the conditioned stimulus as a given
event plus the lapse of so many units of time. The
introduction of an interval of time between response and
reinforcer in operant conditioning is also of little interest
here. The effectiveness of the reinforcement is reduced, but
the behavior is not otherwise greatly changed.
When temporal properties are added to the three-term
contingency of the discriminative operant, however, special
effects follow. A response is sometimes reinforced only if it
is made as rapidly as possible after the appearance of a
given stimulus. A contingency of this sort is responsible for
the speed with which many people rush to answer the
telephone. Picking up the telephone and saying "Hello" is
reinforced only if the response is made quickly. The runner
responds to the starting gun in the same way for the same
reason. In a typical "reaction-time" experiment a subject is
instructed to lift a finger off a key as soon as a light has
appeared or a tone has sounded, with the result that the
behavior comes to occur "as soon as possible." Although the
instructions given the subject in a reaction-time experiment
or to the runner starting a race are complex, the effect upon
behavior is due to the simple three-term contingency with an
added temporal specification. This same contingency will
cause a pigeon to behave "as quickly as possible" also. The
pigeon's reaction time is of approximately the same
magnitude as man's.
A response may also be reinforced only if it is delayed by
a given interval of time after presentation of the stimulus.
Thus, a pigeon is reinforced for pecking a key only if it
waits, say, six seconds after the key is presented. Many
social and commercial reinforcements are of this sort—
where, for example, the net effect is reduced if one replies
too quickly or agrees too readily to an arrangement or where
an optimal reinforcement follows only after "due
deliberation." Under contingencies of this sort, the maximal
probability of response is characteristically reached a little
before the required interval has elapsed.
A characteristic effect of a delay is sometimes referred to
as "expectancy" or "anticipation." Let us suppose that a
frequent visitor makes it a practice to give a child a bit of
candy a few minutes after

OPERANT DISCRIMINATION

127

arrival. How can we formulate the behavior of the child in
"anticipating" the gift of candy? We may note, first of all,
that the arrival of the visitor serves as a conditioned
stimulus and that the child's mouth will possibly water. If the
interval which elapses between the arrival and the
presentation of candy is fairly uniform, a temporal
discrimination may develop so that this conditioned
response will not appear until the interval has almost
elapsed. If certain movements on the part of the visitor have
usually preceded the presentation of candy, any movement
on the part of the visitor will be reinforcing. The child will
therefore "attend" to the visitor, as that term has just been
defined. He will watch the visitor closely. If any verbal
stimuli have been especially correlated with the candy, he
will also listen to whatever the visitor is saying, since
listening will have been reinforced by such stimuli. Any
behavior on the part of the child which has made the
appearance of candy more probable has also been reinforced
and will be strong. The child may make himself
conspicuous by "showing off," for example. For the same
reason he may refer to former gifts and thus supply a "hint"
to the visitor (Chapter XV).
Much of the child's behavior will be emotional. It is easier
to observe this when the "anticipated" stimulus is aversive.
As we shall see in Chapter XI, the emotional state in such a
case is called "anxiety." When the anticipated stimulus is
positively reinforcing, there is a general change in the
behavior of the child in the direction of greater excitement
and responsiveness. These are to some extent the
strengthening aspects of "joy" or "delight." (We shall see in
Chapter X that these terms must be used with caution.)
There is still another ingredient in "anticipation." The
behavior of the runner in response to the words "Get ready,
get set . . ." shows all the effects so far listed: (1)
conditioned reflexes involving pulse, respiration, sweating,
and so on, (2) a special controlling relation to the voice of
the starter which we call "close attention," and (3)
emotional changes which, if the race is to be a grueling one,
will be more characteristic of anxiety than of joy. In addition
to all this, the runner tenses his muscles and adopts just that
posture which will make his response to the signal "Go!"
most effective. This kind

128

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

of behavior, sometimes called "preparatory set," is reinforced
by the increased speed of the response which follows. The
behavior may be nothing more than a partial execution of the
response of "going," sometimes revealed in the false start, or
it may consist of any other form of behavior which receives
the net reinforcement of a more successful start—for
example, holding still rather than rocking back and forth on
one's toes.

CHAPTER VII

THE CONTROLLING
ENVIRONMENT
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE ENVIRONMENT
No matter what our philosophy of behavior may be,
we are not likely to deny that the world about us is
important. We may disagree as to the nature or extent of the
control which it holds over us, but some control is obvious.
Behavior must be appropriate to the occasion. Failure to
keep in touch with reality leads to the kinds of difficulties
often observed in psychotic behavior. Even when a man is
engaged in rejecting the world, in systematically reducing
certain forms of its control over him, he is physically
interacting with it.
Many theories of human behavior, nevertheless, neglect or
ignore the action of the environment. The contact between
the organism and the surrounding world is wholly
disregarded or at best casually described. This is almost
always true in clinical psychology, for example. The
clinician often speaks of people, places, and things as
"facts" entering into the interpretation of his patient's
behavior, without further specifying their action. This
practice may be adequate for certain purposes of
communication, but it must be expected to fail at some
point. Some of the problems of clinical psychology show
that that point is often reached. A case history may inform
us,
129

130

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

for example, that on a given day the patient saw an
acquaintance who was approaching him cross the street, and
this event may be regarded as significant in interpreting the
patient's behavior. But the report "X saw Y cross the street"
does not prepare us for many possibly relevant questions.
For example, what are the important properties of visual
patterns which lead X to say, "That is Y"? Was X's report of
this event determined by a clear visual stimulus possessing
these properties—in other words, was it really Y or did X
merely "think it was Y"? In the latter case how plausible
was the mistake? How much of the effect upon X was due to
the appearance of Y as a person and how much to Y's
behavior in crossing the street? Upon what past occasions
had similar stimuli affected X, and what conditioning had
taken place with respect to people who cross streets,
whether or not they were Y? To what extent was X's
reaction due to a condition which we may describe by
saying that X was "afraid that Y was avoiding him"? Did
earlier conditioning with respect to people who cross streets
really involve Z, who resembles Y, and if so, may we say
that Y was serving as a "symbol" for Z?
Questions of this sort are frequently treated in the later
discussion of a case history, but often they would not arise if
the earlier analysis of the contact between organism and
environment had been adequate. An improved analysis
would mean, not necessarily more information in any
particular instance, but rather an understanding of the ways
in which stimuli generally work. The casual account ignores
many important points.
THE ANALYSIS OF STIMULI
In studying the extremely important independent variables
which lie in the immediate environment, we may begin with
a physical description. What is the structure of the world
which we see, hear, touch, smell, and taste? We should not
prejudge these events from their effects upon the organism.
They are to be described in the usual terms of the physics of
light and sound, the chemistry of odorous or tasteful
substances, and so on. We are interested, of course, only in
conditions or events which have an effect upon behavior.
The electromagnetic radiation of radio and television has

OPERANT DISCRIMINATION

131

no effect upon the unequipped organism, except perhaps at
very high energy levels. We do not say that the radiation is
"not a stimulus because it does not stimulate." We simply
ignore it just as we ignore the color of the apparatus we use
in the study of mechanics as soon as we find it to be
irrelevant.
The kinds of events which stimulate the organism are
effective only within certain limits. We hear sound, but only
of certain pitches and intensities. We see light, but only of
certain intensities and wave lengths. The limits of
stimulation, and also the smallest differences in stimuli
which make detectable differences in behavior, have been
extensively investigated. The normal individual differs
from the blind or color-blind in his reaction to visible
radiation, from the deaf or partially deaf in his reaction to
tones, from the anosmic in his reaction to odors, and so on.
Smaller differences between normal individuals may be
equally important. Research of this sort often emphasizes
the action of the organ where the interchange with the
environment takes place—the eye, the ear, the taste buds in
the tongue, and so on—but the whole organism may be
involved. What appear to be simple sensory reactions often
depend upon variables in the fields of conditioning,
motivation, and emotion.
Several important problems concerning stimulation are
relatively independent of the particular physical properties
of stimuli and of their range of effectiveness. In attacking
these problems it does not matter whether the receiving
organ is the eye or ear, for example, and we may work with
values of stimuli which do not raise the problem of limits. In
discussing the stimulus functions of elicitation,
discrimination, and reinforcement, it was not always
necessary to specify the nature of the stimulation, and we
shall see in Chapter IX that this is also true of another
function of stimuli in the field of emotion. There are even
more general processes which may be studied not only
without considering the particular form of energy exchange
at the periphery of the organism, but also without specifying
whether the stimuli are eliciting, discriminative, reinforcing,
or emotional. In the following discussion the discriminative
stimulus will be emphasized, but each process could
presumably be demonstrated in the other functions as well.

132

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

INDUCTION
When we have once brought behavior under the control of
a given stimulus, we frequently find that certain other
stimuli are also effective. If a pigeon has been conditioned
to peck a red spot on the wall of the experimental chamber,
the response will also be evoked, though not with the same
frequency, by an orange or even a yellow spot. The property
of redness is important, but not exclusively so. Spots of
different shapes or sizes, or spots against different colors of
background, also may be effective. To evaluate the full
extent of the change brought about through reinforcement,
we need to survey the effects of a large number of stimuli.
The spread of the effect to other stimuli is called
generalization or induction. The process suggests that a
discrete stimulus is as arbitrary a notion as a discrete
operant. The "identical elements" of a response have their
parallels in the values or properties of a stimulus which are
separately effective. If we reinforce a response to a round,
red spot one square inch in area, a yellow spot of the same
size and shape will be effective because of the common
properties of size and shape; a square, red spot of the same
area will be effective because of its color and size; and a
round, red spot half a square inch in area will be effective
because of the common properties of color and shape.
The effectiveness of a single property of a stimulus when
combined with novel properties is shown when we are uneasy
in the presence of a new acquaintance because he resembles
someone whom we dislike. The very subtle property
responsible for the resemblance is sufficient to arouse an
emotional reaction. The Freudian argument that early
emotional conditioning affects later personal adjustment
presupposes such a process, in which the subtle property by
virtue of which an acquaintance resembles one's father or
mother, for example, is said to be independently effective.
The Freudian "symbol" presupposes the same process: a
piece of abstract sculpture which generates an emotional
response because it resembles the human body demonstrates
the effectiveness of the property responsible for the
resemblance. As Freud pointed out, the resemblance may be
effective whether or not it is recognized by the individual.

OPERANT DISCRIMINATION

133

In literature the same process is exemplified by the device
of metaphor. The emphasis in the usual rhetorical analysis is
inverted, for the active control is assigned to the organism
rather than to the stimulus. The speaker is said to transfer a
description from one state of affairs to another which
resembles it. We should say here that the metaphorical
response is evoked by a stimulus which shares some of the
properties of the stimulus to which the response is normally
appropriate. Thus when Romeo compares Juliet to the sun,
we need not suppose that he is engaging in an act of creative
imagination; we need only suppose that Juliet's effect upon
him shares some of the properties of the effect of the sun
and that the verbal response "sun" is therefore strengthened.
(The elaboration of the metaphor must be distinguished
from an explanation of its ingredients. The first step is to
account for the appearance of the metaphorical term. This
can usually be done by pointing to a property of a current
stimulus which is possessed also by the customary stimulus
for the verbal response.)
We check the importance of any dimension of a stimulus
by examining the effect of different values. After building
up a strong tendency to respond to a red spot, we may
examine the rate of response during extinction to orange-red,
orange, yellow-orange, and yellow. An experiment of this
sort yields a generalization or induction gradient. The
responding during extinction is most rapid whenever the
spot is red. It is slightly slower to orange-red and much
slower to yellow. An experimental animal such as the pigeon
may not respond at all if the color is as different as, say,
green, even though the two spots have common properties
of shape, position, illumination, and being visual rather than,
say, auditory stimuli. For the pigeon, therefore, color is
obviously an important property. A color-blind organism, on
the other hand, would not show this gradient; the rate would
not change with color, if differences in brightness, texture,
and so on were eliminated. Other properties of stimuli yield
similar gradients when systematically explored. This
procedure enables us to answer such a question as whether a
given change in color is as important for the organism as a
given change in size, or even whether color is as important a
property of visual

134

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

stimuli as pitch is of auditory stimuli. Not all the dimensions
of stimuli, however, are continuous in this way.
DISCRIMINATION
Induction (or generalization) is not an activity of the
organism; it is simply a term which describes the fact that
the control acquired by a stimulus is shared by other stimuli
with common properties or, to put it another way, that
control is shared by all the properties of the stimulus taken
separately. A particular combination of properties comprises
what we speak of as a stimulus, but the expression does not
represent the control exercised by the environment very
accurately.
The discrimination described in Chapter VII is also not a
form of action on the part of the organism. When we
establish a discrimination between red and orange spots of
light, we simply sharpen a natural gradient. By continuing to
reinforce red spots while extinguishing orange spots, the
control of the property of redness is consistently
strengthened, while that of the property of orange is
consistently weakened. In such an experiment, other
properties of the stimuli—for example, size, shape, and
location—are both reinforced and extinguished. Those who
work with pigments, dyes, or other colored materials are
affected by contingencies in which slight differences in color
make a great deal of difference in the consequences of
behavior. We say that they become "highly discriminating"
with respect to color. But their behavior shows only
processes of conditioning and extinction.
ABSTRACTION
Behavior may be brought under the control of a single
property or a special combination of properties of a stimulus
while being freed from the control of all other properties.
The characteristic result is known as abstraction. The
relation to discrimination may be shown by an example. By
reinforcing responses to a circular red spot while
extinguishing responses to circular spots of all other colors,
we may give the red spot exclusive control over the
behavior. This is discrimination. Since spots of other colors
apparently have no effect,

OPERANT DISCRIMINATION

135

it would appear that the other dimensions which they
possess—for example, size, shape, and location—are
unimportant. But this is not quite true, since it is less likely
that the response will be made to a red object of another size
and shape. We have, in other words, brought the response
under the control of circular red spots but not of the
"property of redness" alone. To achieve the latter, we must
reinforce responses to many objects, all of which are red,
but which differ widely in their other properties. Eventually,
the organism responds only to the property of redness. The
case is exemplified by the verbal response "red." It should
be remembered, however, that a perfectly abstract response
is probably never achieved. Stimuli which possess the
required property but which are quite extraordinary in other
respects may not evoke the response. Stimuli without the
required property which resemble especially common
instances which possess it may also exert some control.
Abstraction, too, is not a form of action on the part of the
organism. It is simply a narrowing of the control exercised
by the properties of stimuli. The controlling property cannot
be demonstrated upon a single occasion. In other words, a
single instance of an abstract response will not tell us very
much about its "referent." The controlling relation can be
discovered only through a survey of a large number of
instances.
We are likely to overlook the history required for an
abstract response, and we make many mistakes in
interpreting behavior when we do so. When a child is taught
to call a red ball red, we are surprised to find him calling a
green ball red. In our own behavior, the response has long
since come under the control of a particular color, but in the
behavior of the child the properties of size, shape, and
manipulability remain important until a program of
differential reinforcement rules them out.
An organism will not acquire an abstract response until a
reinforcing agency sets up the required contingency. There
are no "natural" contingencies which reinforce a response in
the presence of a single property without respect to other
properties. The necessary contingency apparently requires
the mediation of other organisms. Abstraction, therefore,
appears to have become possible only with

136

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

the development of verbal behavior. It does not follow that,
if this was the case, abstract responses could never have
arisen; for it is not impossible to conceive of events in a
group of individuals which could have given rise to the
rudiments of a verbal environment from which abstract
verbal behavior could then have sprung. The matter,
however, is highly speculative.
We are in a better position to see how abstractions grow
and change. Verbal behavior, perpetuated by the verbal
community, has succeeded in isolating more and more
subtle properties of nature. Sometimes we can watch this
happen. Sometimes we can make plausible speculations as
to how it might have happened. Etymology often supplies
valuable clues. The word "chance," for example, comes
from a word which referred to the fall of a die or coin. A
conspicuous feature of such an event is the indeterminacy of
the result, which is similar to the indeterminacy of other
events in which nothing falls—for example, of the suit of a
card drawn from a deck. The metaphorical transfer of the
term for falling, on the basis of indeterminacy, is the first
step in isolating this important property. The referent of the
term is further refined—perhaps through centuries of
changing practices in a verbal community—until in the
hands of the modern mathematician the term comes under
the control of a very special property of nature, the modem
referent of the word "chance."
SOME TRADITIONAL PROBLEMS
IN STIMULUS CONTROL
Cross-modal induction. We sometimes find that a
response is under the control of two stimuli which have no
physical properties in common. If it has been conditioned to
each of the stimuli separately, no explanation is required;
but apparently this is not always the case. "Induction"
appears to occur although common properties are lacking.
Sometimes an intermediate connection can be discovered.
Pins and pains are both called "sharp." That sharp pins cause
sharp pains may be relevant. It is only a short step from "the
pin is sharp" to "the pain caused by the pin is sharp." Once
this verbal practice has been established in a community, the
response is

OPERANT DISCRIMINATION

137

usually learned separately in the two cases and is then no
longer an issue.
Common mediating behavior supplies another possible
explanation. When Samuel Butler once saw the Wetterhorn,
he caught himself humming an aria from Handel. "The big
shoulder of the Wetterhorn seemed to fall just like the run on
[the word] 'shoulder.' " Here an auditory response appears to
have been made to a visual stimulus which in some way
resembled it. Presumably Butler had not heard the one while
looking at the other; and we may suppose, for the sake of the
example, that he had also not seen the musical phrase in
visual form. We may account for the result if we assume that
the two stimuli were capable of generating similar behavior.
If Butler had learned to execute certain spatial responses to
the "ups" and "downs" of pitch—say, in playing an instrument
—and if, as the amateur artist he was, he had learned to
respond to visual patterns with the copying responses
described in Chapter VII, then the two stimuli could have
evoked a common form of behavior, self-stimulation from
which might have served as the basis for the response. The
melodic line of the aria could have evoked a response which
generated stimulation often followed by the response
"Wetterhorn." Conversely, the profile of the Wetterhorn could
have evoked a response which in turn generated stimulation
often followed by imitative humming or the verbal response
"Handel." In this particular instance the verbal response
"shoulder" provides a clear cut example of mediating
behavior. The shoulder of the mountain strengthens the
verbal response "shoulder" which has been part of the
auditory pattern of the aria. Speculation of this sort proves
nothing, but it does suggest a possible solution of the
problem of induction from one sensory field to another. An
adequate solution would require an experimental analysis of the
various auxiliary processes through which stimulus control can
be extended.
Responding to a relation. If an organism has been
conditioned to choose a five-inch disk rather than a threeinch disk when the two are presented together, it may
choose a seven-inch disk if this is paired with the five-inch.
This fact has frequently been offered as a criticism of the
principle of the stimulus. If the five-inch disk is

138

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

the controlling stimulus, why is it not effective in the new
combination? Actually it is possible to condition an
organism either to choose the larger of two objects or to
choose a particular size no matter what the size of an
accompanying object. Similar conditioning begins very
early in the history of the individual, and the behavior which
predominates when a test is made will depend upon such a
history. The relational case is important in most
environments. As the organism moves about in space,
reinforcements are generally contingent upon relative, rather
than absolute, size.
Stimulus induction on the basis of a "relation" presents no
difficulty in a natural science if the relation can be described
in physical terms. Where this appears not to be the case, we
have to turn to other possibilities—for example, the
mediating behavior just discussed. Even such relatively
simple organisms as the pigeon may respond appropriately
to new stimuli on the basis of relative size, relative intensity,
relative position, and so on. They can also be conditioned to
ignore any of these properties and to transfer a response on
the basis of some other property. The relevant properties are
all capable of physical specification.
The "interpreted" stimulus. Another problem in
stimulus control has attracted more attention than it deserves
because of metaphysical speculations on what is "really
there" in the outside world. What happens when an
organism responds "as if" a stimulus had other properties?
Such behavior seems to indicate that the "perceptual" world
—the world as the organism experiences it—is different from
the real world. But the difference is actually between
responses—between the responses of two organisms or
between the responses of one organism under different
modes of stimulation from a single state of affairs. Thus I
may "think" I have found my coat on the coat rack of a
restaurant, though I discover upon examining the contents of
the pockets that I am wrong. I may "think" that an object in
the sky is a plane only to see a moment later that it is a
soaring bird. I may "think" that an object is square only to
find when I shift my position that it is not. I may "think" that
a spot of light has moved from one point to another,
although an examination of the wiring circuit which has
produced the spot convinces me that it merely

OPERANT DISCRIMINATION

139

disappeared from one position and reappeared at the other.
There is no reason to regard the first of each of these pairs
of reactions as "perceptual" and the second as a form of
contact with the real world. They are different responses
made at different times to a common source of stimulation.
Usually, objects are capable of generating many different
kinds of stimuli which are related to each other in certain
ways. Responses to some forms of stimulation are more
likely to be "right" than responses to others, in the sense that
they are more likely to lead to effective behavior. Naturally
these modes are favored, but any suggestion that they bring
us closer to the "real" world is out of place here. As we saw
in Chapter VII, the visual and tactual properties of objects in
space lead us to develop an effective repertoire in which we
approach and reach for objects successfully. To take a
specific case, the visual stimuli generated by a square object
are usually accompanied by other visual stimuli when the
object is seen from another angle or placed alongside
measuring scales, as well as by certain tactual stimuli when
the object is manipulated. Now, we can construct an object
which, seen from a given point of view, supplies the
stimulation characteristic of a square object, although it
supplies very different stimuli when handled, measured, or
viewed from other angles. Once we have responded to such
an object in apparently inconsistent ways, we may be less
confident in saying "square" to any one set of visual stimuli,
but we have no reason to argue that our original visual
response was not to the object "as it really is." We operate in
one world—the world of physics. Organisms are part of that
world, and they react to it in many ways. Responses may be
consistent with each other or inconsistent, but there is
usually little difficulty in accounting for either case.
To take another example, suppose we observe a faint haze
in the distance at the edge of a forest. This stimulus is
appropriate to either of two large classes to which we emit
the verbal responses "fog" and "smoke," respectively. The
appropriate nonverbal responses are very different: in one
case we simply pass on; in the other we dash to give the
alarm. We may do neither until we have "decided which it
really is." We "interpret" the stimulus before taking specific
overt

140

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

action. But "interpretation" is like the "attention" discussed
in Chapter VII; we need not find a particular form of
behavior to be identified with it. We "interpret" a stimulus
as smoke insofar as we tend to respond with behavior
appropriate to smoke. We "interpret" it as fog insofar as the
probability of a different repertoire is increased. It is only
when specific behavior has occurred that we can say that a
stimulus has been "interpreted" in a given way, but we may
still speak meaningfully of both probabilities. A given
stimulus may have two different effects simultaneously
when they are compatible, and two different effects in rapid
alternation when they are not. A complex condition of
indecision may prevail until the matter is resolved either by
clarifying the stimulus or in some other way. (What happens
when we make a decision will be discussed in Chapter
XVI.) The functional control exerted by a stimulus enables
us to distinguish between sensing and certain other activities
suggested by such terms as "seeing," "perceiving," or
"knowing." "Sensing" may be taken to refer to the mere
reception of stimuli. "Seeing" is the "interpretive" behavior
which a stimulus controls. The term "seeing" characterizes a
special relation between behavior and stimuli. It is different
from "sensing" just as responding is different from being
stimulated. Our "perception" of the world—our
"knowledge" of it —is our behavior with respect to the
world. It is not to be confused with the world itself or with
other behavior with respect to the world or with the behavior
of others with respect to the world.

CHAPTER IX

DEPRIVATION AND SATIATION

The discovery that part of the behavior of an
organism was under the control of the environment led, as
we have seen, to an. unwarranted extension of the notion of
the stimulus. Writers began to infer stimuli where none
could be observed and to include various internal conditions
in a "total stimulating situation." The principle of the
stimulus was weakened by this extension and often
abandoned in favor of other formulations of a less specific
nature. It may be restored to usefulness in its proper sphere
by distinguishing, as we have done, between the several
functions of stimuli. We have now to note that some effects
of the environment are not usefully classified as stimulation
at all. When we deprive an organism of food, for example,
we may stimulate it, but this is incidental to the main effect.
DEPRIVATION
We saw in Chapter III that the probability of drinking
becomes very high under severe water deprivation and very
low under excessive satiation. It is reasonable to assume
that the probability always lies somewhere between these
two extremes and that if the deprivation is changed, it
simply moves toward one or the other. The biological
significance of the change in probability is obvious. Water is
constantly being lost through excretion and evaporation,
and
141

142

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

an equal amount must be taken in to compensate for this
loss. Under ordinary circumstances an organism drinks
intermittently and maintains a fairly steady and presumably
optimal state. When this interchange is disturbed—when the
organism is deprived of the opportunity to drink—it is
obviously important that drinking should be more likely to
occur at the first opportunity. In the evolutionary sense this
"explains" why water deprivation strengthens all
conditioned and unconditioned behavior concerned with the
intake of water. In a similar way we explain why an
organism deprived of the opportunity to get rid of carbon
dioxide breathes more rapidly and more deeply, why the
feeding reflexes of the newborn baby grow more powerful
as time elapses after feeding, and why a pet dog hovers
about its feeding place in the kitchen as mealtime grows
near.
The adaptive character of the increase in probability is
sometimes expressed in another way. Deprivation is said to
disturb some kind of equilibrium which the strengthened
behavior tends to restore. The tendency of living systems to
maintain or restore equilibrium, which W. B. Cannon called
homeostasis, has been of special interest to physiologists.
The notion of equilibrium is compatible with a functional
analysis, but the two should not be confused. A study of
equilibrium may enable us to predict the direction in which
behavior will change as the result of a change in an
independent variable, but it will not tell us much more.
Equilibrium is hard to define and even harder to observe and
measure. A much more clear-cut program is to show how
deprivation affects the probability of relevant behavior, and
this may be done without mentioning equilibrium.
Not all deprivation or satiation is concerned with the
conspicuous interchange of materials. A man may be
"deprived of physical exercise" if he is kept indoors by bad
weather; as a result he is especially likely to be active when
the weather clears. Here deprivation consists merely of
preventing the occurrence of behavior, and the emission of
the behavior is itself satiating. Sexual satiation appears to be
the result of the mere exercise of sexual behavior as well as
of the special consequence known as the orgasm. Each
mode of satiation must be dealt with in terms of the relevant
economy of the organism, and its biological significance must
be interpreted accordingly.

DEPRIVATION AND SATIATION

143

Certain other kinds of operations which, as we saw in
Chapter III, have effects similar to deprivation and satiation
are conveniently included under the common heading of
"motivation."
A given act of deprivation usually increases the strength of
many kinds of behavior simultaneously. As the newborn
baby goes unfed, reflex sucking increases in strength, and
movements of the head in response to tactual stimuli at the
cheeks and in the region of the mouth (by virtue of which
the head is turned so that the breast is more readily received)
become more vigorous. Eventually, many other forms of
behavior are added to this group. Similarly, when an adult
goes without water for a long time, a large group of operants
are strengthened. Not only does he drink more readily when
a glass of water is presented, he also will engage in many
other activities which lead to the ingestion of water—going
to the kitchen, operating a drinking fountain, asking for a
glass of water, and so on.
NEEDS AND DRIVES
In traditional terms an organism drinks because it needs
water, goes for a walk because it needs exercise, breathes
more rapidly and deeply because it wants air, and eats
ravenously because of the promptings of hunger. Needs,
wants, and hungers, are good examples of the inner causes
discussed in Chapter III. They are said to have various
dimensions. Needs and wants are likely to be thought of as
psychic or mental, while hungers are more readily
conceived of as physiological. But the terms are freely used
when nothing with these dimensions has been observed.
Sometimes the inner operation is inferred from the operation
responsible for the strength of the behavior—as when we
say that someone who has had nothing to drink for several
days "must be thirsty" and probably will drink. On the other
hand, it is sometimes inferred from the behavior itself—as
when we observe someone drinking large quantities of water
and assert without hesitation that he possesses a great thirst.
In the first case, we infer the inner event from a prior
independent variable and predict the dependent variable
which is to follow. In the second case, we infer the inner
event from the event which follows, and attribute it to a
preceding history of deprivation. So long as the inner event

144

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

is inferred, it is in no sense an explanation of the behavior
and adds nothing to a functional account.
Needs and wants are convenient terms in casual discourse,
and many students of behavior have been interested in
setting up similar hypothetical intervening states as legitimate
scientific concepts. A need or want could simply be
redefined as a condition resulting from deprivation and
characterized by a special probability of response. Since it is
difficult to lay the ghosts which hover about these older
terms, there is a certain advantage in using a term which has
fewer connotations. "Drive" is sometimes used. A drive
need not be thought of as mental or physiological. The term
is simply a convenient way of referring to the effects of
deprivation and satiation and of other operations which alter
the probability of behavior in more or less the same way. It
is convenient because it enables us to deal with many cases
at once. There are many ways of changing the probability
that an organism will eat; at the same time, a single kind of
deprivation strengthens many kinds of behavior. The
concept of hunger as a drive brings these various relations
together in a single term.
The simplicity of the concept of drive is only apparent.
This is true as well of need and want. No concept can
eliminate an actual diversity of data. A drive is a verbal
device with which we account for a state of strength, and it
cannot answer experimental questions. We cannot control
the behavior of an organism by directly changing its hunger,
its thirst, or its sex drive. In order to change these states
indirectly, we must deal with the relevant variables of
deprivation and satiation and must face all the complexity
of these operations.
A drive is not a stimulus. A common belief is that
deprivation affects the organism by creating a stimulus. The
classic example is hunger pangs. When an organism has
been without food for a sufficient time, the contractions of
the empty stomach stimulate it in a characteristic way. This
stimulation is often identified with the hunger drive. But
such stimulation is not closely correlated with the
probability of eating. Hunger pangs are characteristic of only
a small part of the range through which that probability
varies continuously. We usually eat our meals without
reaching the condition of depriva-

DEPRIVATION AND SATIATION

145

tion in which pangs are felt, and we continue to eat long
after the first few mouthfuls have stopped any pangs which may
have occurred. The attempt to find comparable stimulation in
other drives has proved futile and occasionally even
ludicrous. Dryness of the throat does not vary continuously
with a tendency to drink through the entire range of
deprivation. Any comparable stimulation under sexual
deprivation is poorly correlated with the probability of
sexual behavior. In any case a drive, as defined above,
cannot be a stimulus.
A drive is not a physiological state. Certain internal
conditions probably result from any given degree of
deprivation. Adequate independent knowledge of them might
enable us to dispense with a history of deprivation in
predicting behavior; but we are not likely to have such
knowledge about a given organism at the moment when it
would be useful in prediction; and we are even less likely to
be able to create such an appropriate state directly in order
to control behavior. Insofar as we infer the state from the
history of deprivation or generate it by creating such a history,
it is of no value in enabling us to dispense with that history.
Even when it is directly observed, it may still be useless in
control. We have seen that in laboratory research the weight
of an organism is often used as an index of food
deprivation. To maintain a given level of drive, the organism
is kept at a given percentage of its weight when well fed. The
weight is easily observed, and as a fairly direct result of a
history of deprivation it can generally be used as a substitute
for such a history. But since we change the weight only by
changing the history, it cannot be used as a substitute in
practical control. In any case, we do not assert that the weight
of the organism is the hunger drive.
A drive is not a psychic state. A parallel argument applies
to the mental or psychic states with which drives are often
identified. Here the possibility of independent evidence is more
doubtful. What people "feel" when they are deprived of food,
oxygen, and so on, will be considered in Chapter XVII.
Since deprivation affects behavior, whether or not anything
is "felt," the feeling is not a secure basis for prediction.
Direct manipulation of a psychic condition for purposes of
control seems even more doubtful.

146

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

A drive is not simply a state of strength. A strong "drive
to chew gum" is sometimes attributed to a person, not with
reference to any history of deprivation, but simply because
he tends to chew gum. It is possible that some relevant
deprivation which would alter the tendency to chew gum
could be uncovered, but no reference is made to such an
operation in this use of the term. The possibility remains
that the strength of the behavior is due to other kinds of
variables not in the field of motivation. Other terms which
often do nothing more than report the unusual strength of
behavior are "desire" ("He has a strong desire to go to
Europe"), "wish" ("He wishes his father were dead"), and
"complex" ("He has a sex complex"). The probability of
response may be due to many different kinds of variables,
where deprivation plays a minor role. For example, the strong
"drive" of the gambler, his gambling "complex," or his
"desire" to gamble may not be primarily due to a condition
of deprivation at all, since a carefully arranged schedule of
variable-ratio reinforcement will lead to a high probability of
responding at a relatively low level of deprivation.
THE PRACTICAL USE OF DRIVES
Some examples of how behavior is actually controlled
through deprivation and satiation will show how easily
concepts referring to intervening states may be avoided.
Deprivation is put to practical use when a child is made
more likely to drink milk by restriction of his water intake;
when guests are induced to eat a modest meal with greater
gusto by a delay in serving the meal; when the prisoner is
made more likely to talk to interrogators by being put in
"solitary" ("depriving him of talking" as in the case of the
"need for exercise" discussed above); when a population is
made more likely to cooperate with the authorities who
control food supplies by reducing rations; and when a child
is kept interested in his toys by being given only one at a
time. Operations which have a similar effect are put to
practical use when guests are induced to consume more
cocktails at a party at which salty hors d'oeuvres are served,
and when sexual behavior is intensified by the
administration of certain hormones or aphrodisiacs.
Extensive engi-

DEPRIVATION AND SATIATION

147

neering control is obviously necessary to achieve some of these
conditions for either theoretical or practical purposes. It is
sometimes possible to use conditions which arise
fortuitously. For example, waterfront brothels and other
amusement enterprises take advantage of the deprivations
suffered by sailors a t sea. Wartime shortages generate largescale deprivations, and these are frequently exploited for both
theoretical and commercial purposes.
Satiation is put to practical use when a table d'hote
restaurant serves a large supply of good bread while a meal is
being prepared in order to serve small portions of the rest of
the meal without complaint (it is obviously a bad practice to
serve bread if the customer has still to order a la carte);
when an abundance of hors d'oeuvres is used to conceal the
scantiness of the dinner which follows; when legalized
prostitution is recommended on the ground that it reduces the
probability of sexual behavior in members of the population
who might, if unsatiated, otherwise attack innocent women;
when bread lines are set up to reduce the violence which
would otherwise result from meager rations; and when a clinic
reduces aggressive or otherwise undesirable behavior by giving
the individual attention, approval, or even affection. An effect
comparable to satiation is obtained when a drug is
administered to reduce the probability of sexual behavior.
All these examples could be described by reference to
"drives." We could say that the eating of salty hors d'oeuvres
makes a guest thirsty and that his thirst then drives him to
drink. It is simpler, in both theory and practice, to restrict
ourselves to the fact that consuming salty hors d'oeuvres
leads to drinking.
These operations are not to be confused with operant
conditioning through which behavior is brought under the
control of a different deprivation. A government which offers a
bonus for having a baby in a program designed to raise the
birth rate is not increasing the deprivation which controls
procreation. By reinforcing the behavior of procreation with
money, the behavior is brought under the control of a larger set
of deprivations. The behavior can then be strengthened by
depriving an individual of money or of anything money will
buy —as by severe taxation. The effect may be canceled by
satiating the individual directly with money or indirectly with
whatever money

148

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

will buy. This might be done by an employer who responded to
such a bonus by increasing wages in order to keep the families
of his employees small. So long as such a bonus is offered,
an increase in relief or unemployment insurance may affect the
birth rate. The level of sexual deprivation meanwhile has not
necessarily been changed.
SOME QUESTIONS CONCERNING DRIVE
How many drives are there? Is the maternal drive stronger
than sex or hunger? Will satiating such a drive as hunger
partially reduce a drive like sex? Can all drives be reduced to
sex? Questions of this sort are more easily answered when
restated in terms of deprivation and satiation.
How many drives are there? The question has two
translations. When we are inferring drives from histories of
deprivation, we may ask in how many ways an organism can
be deprived. We can answer this only by exploration—by
interfering with the exchange between organism and
environment and observing the result. When we reduce the
proportions of certain inert gases in the air breathed by the
organism, we observe no change in its behavior. In such a
case we do not speak of the "need" for such gases, or of any
"drive" to get them. In translation, we do not list what we
have done as an instance of deprivation. The fact that a gas
has no biological value is irrelevant. We might deprive an
organism of an essential food substance and still observe no
change in its behavior, even though it might become ill or
even die. The physiologist speaks of nutritional "needs," but
deprivation as here defined requires an effect upon behavior.
Our explorations would, of course, uncover many important
cases, each of which might lead us to speak of a drive.
A second translation is needed when we speak of a drive
simply because the probability of behavior varies. The child
who does not eat well is said to be suffering from anorexia—a
lack of hunger. If he eats spasmodically, it is because his
hunger is unpredictable—he is sometimes hungry and
sometimes not. Here we use the concept of drive, not to refer
to a history of ingestion, but simply to account (spuriously)
for unexplained changes in probability. (Characteristically, we
do not postulate a drive if the probability does not change.

DEPRIVATION AND SATIATION

149

The reflex secretion of tears in response to irritation does not
vary from moment to moment in any way which cannot
otherwise be explained, and hence we do not speak of a
drive to rid the eyes of foreign substances.) Our question
thus becomes: How many kinds of behavior vary in strength
independently of each other? On this basis we can
distinguish between eating, drinking, sexual behavior, and so
on, as well as between subdivisions of each of these fields. If
the probabilities of eating two kinds of food always vary
together, we assume a common hunger; but if at certain times
an organism eats salt more readily than sugar and at other
times sugar more readily than salt, we find it necessary to
speak of separate salt- and sugar-hungers. Presumably,
separate operations of satiation and deprivation have
accompanied these changes although they are not described by
this use of the term "hunger."
What are the drives of conditioned responses? Satiation and
deprivation are obviously related to operant reinforcement. To
a hungry organism food is both reinforcing and satiating. As
we shall see in Chapter XIV, it is necessary, although
sometimes difficult, to distinguish between these effects. In
reinforcement the presentation of food is contingent upon a
response; we can satiate without consistently reinforcing if
we avoid this contingency. We can also reinforce without
substantial satiation or at least before satiation has taken
place. But there is an inevitable connection between the two
processes: the effect of operant reinforcement will not be
observed if the organism has not been appropriately
deprived. The net result of reinforcement is not simply to
strengthen behavior but to strengthen it in a given state of
deprivation. Reinforcement thus brings behavior under the
control of an appropriate deprivation After we have
conditioned a pigeon to stretch its neck by reinforcing with
food, the variable which controls neck-stretching is food
deprivation. The response of stretching the neck has merely
joined that group of responses which vary with this operation.
We can describe the effect of reinforcement in no simpler way.
By conditioning and extinguishing a response under
different degrees of deprivation, it is possible to see the effect
of deprivation in detail. If we reinforce a response in a group
of organisms at the

150

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

same level of deprivation and extinguish it in subgroups at
different levels, we find that the number of responses in the
extinction curve is a function of deprivation. The hungrier
the organism, the more responses it will emit during
extinction. If, on the other hand, we condition at different
levels of deprivation and extinguish at the same level, we
find, surprisingly enough, that the two extinction curves
contain approximately the same number of responses. The
effect of deprivation is felt during extinction, not during
conditioning.
Behavior which has been strengthened by a conditioned
reinforcer varies with the deprivation appropriate to the
primary reinforcer. The behavior of going to a restaurant is
composed of a sequence of responses, early members of
which (for example, going along a certain street) are
reinforced by the appearance of discriminative stimuli
which control later responses (the appearance of the
restaurant, which we then enter). The whole sequence is
ultimately reinforced by food, and the probability varies
with food deprivation. We increase the chances that
someone will go to a restaurant, or even walk along a
particular street, by making him hungry. We do not say that
there are special drives associated with the early responses
in the sequence, because there are no parallel operations of
deprivation. Such traditional terms as "needs," "wants," and
so on recognize these subsidiary steps. For example, we
might say that a man first wants a taxi, that he then wants
the driver to take him to Fifty-sixth Street, that he then
wants to find a particular restaurant, that he then wants to
open the door, that he then wants a table, a menu, and the
roast beef. But since there are no processes of satiation and
deprivation appropriate to the behavior which is involved
here, except for the last item, we have no reason to set up
corresponding drives. A man does not need a taxi in the
sense of not having had a taxi for a long time. Certain
behavior which requires a taxi for its execution is strong and
occurs as soon as a taxi is available. The appearance of the
taxi reinforces any behavior which brings it about. It is also
an enabling event which makes a later response possible and
hence brings the earlier behavior to an end. It would only
confuse the issue however, to say that the appearance of the
taxi had satiated

DEPRIVATION AND SATIATION

151

the behavior of hailing taxis. The practical use of the relation
reveals its essentials. If for some reason we want to induce a
man to hail a taxi, we strengthen any behavior requiring a
taxi; we do not deprive him of taxis. He will not hail a taxi if
he already has one because other behavior then intervenes.
Generalized reinforcers raise this issue in a more acute form.
They are important precisely because they are effective under a
number of deprivations, some of which are likely to be
present at any given time. The lack of a specific deprivation
encourages us to assume a separate drive for the immediate
generalized reinforcer. Although we may be willing to give
up the notion of a "taxi drive," we are likely to insist upon a
drive for attention, approval, affection, domination, or money.
In order to justify assigning separate drives to the behavior
so reinforced, we should have to show that it is possible to
deprive or satiate an organism with given amounts of
attention, approval, and so on, but we should also have to
make sure that no satiation or deprivation is taking place in
any of the primary areas associated with the generalized
reinforcer. For example, we should have to reduce a "need for
affection" by supplying an abundance of affection without
supplying any of the primary reinforcers associated with it.
Only then would we have evidence of an autonomous drive.
But although generalized reinforcers may reinforce when
primary reinforcement is not forthcoming—a case
exemplified by the behavior of the miser in poring over his
gold—we have no reason to assume a corresponding drive. It
is one of the more obvious characteristics of the miser that he
is not actually satiated by money. The reinforcing effect of
money is extraordinarily great, so that most of his behavior
which is strong is strong for that reason, but a separate drive
implies a separate operation of deprivation or satiation, for
which we have little evidence in the behavior of the miser.
There are other kinds of misers who specialize in attention,
affection, approval, or domination. Although we may show
that they are strongly reinforced by these generalized
reinforcers, even in the absence of primary reinforcement, we
do not speak of separate drives because there are no appropriate
operations of deprivation or satiation.
The drives appropriate to conditioned reinforcers are not
to be

152

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

confused with acquired drives for nicotine, alcohol,
morphine, or other drugs. The effects induced by drugs of
this sort reinforce the behavior of consuming them. The drug
may bring release from some aversive condition such as
anxiety, fear, or a sense of guilt (Chapter XI), or it may
produce some condition which is positively reinforcing. The
reinforcement may become more and more powerful if
repeated use leads to physiological changes which increase
the aversive condition which the drug reduces. This sort of
"addiction" is an acquired drive for which well-marked
processes of deprivation and satiation are evident. A potent
technique of control is the development of an addiction. A
drug is administered repeatedly until its reinforcing power
becomes great. It is then used to reinforce desired behavior—
for example, the behavior of a prisoner of war in answering
questions. The drug is then withheld, and the probability of
the behavior increases greatly.
In Chapter V we saw that an event could be a positive
reinforcer even though it did not reduce a level of
deprivation. There is a related point to be made here:
behavior which is strengthened through deprivation need not
reduce that deprivation. The Freudian process of sublimation
raises this issue. Through either stimulus or response
induction an operation which strengthens a response also
strengthens other responses having similar properties or the
same response upon similar occasions. Deprivation is an
example of such an operation. Thus a childless couple may
"sublimate" their parental behavior by treating a pet dog as a
child. The artist "sublimates" sexual behavior in working on
pictures or models of the human body." If we believe that
behavior always takes place "for good reason"— that is,
because of some conceivable biological advantage—many
instances of this sort seem puzzling. But a response
strengthened through induction may very well have no effect
upon the deprivation, even though the response from which it
borrows its strength does have such an effect. In many
examples of sublimation the behavior itself is automatically
satiating.
Are drives interrelated? There is another area in which
it is advantageous to deal with the processes of satiation and
deprivation rather than with any drive. Efforts have been
made to reduce all

DEPRIVATION AND SATIATION

153

motivation to one primary drive. Freud, for example,
emphasized sex. The contention that a given activity is
"essentially sexual in nature" may be translated in either of
two ways depending upon whether we emphasize the
dependent or the independent variable. To say that artistic
and musical activities "express sexual impulses" may mean
that characteristic behavior in this field resembles sexual
behavior in topography. The sculptor modeling a human
figure is behaving to some extent as he would behave toward
a human body; certain temporal aspects of musical behavior
resemble the temporal pattern of sexual behavior. This is
simply induction from one stimulus to another or from one
response to another on the basis of similarity. But it is often
difficult to decide whether two situations or two actions are
similar enough to warrant such an explanation. Often we
have to infer the importance of a point of similarity from its
effect upon behavior. On the other hand the issue may be
expressed in a question of this form: Does the probability of
an act which is asserted to be sexual in nature change with
sex deprivation or satiation? If so, it may be regarded as
sexual even though it is not topographically similar to
obviously sexual behavior.
An alternative contention is that the basic human drive is
"domination." This generalized reinforcer is certainly very
important. The more specific biological reinforcers are
frequently received only after precurrent behavior has been
effective in "dominating" the physical or social environment,
and to this extent we may bring all behavior together under
the rubric of domination. We have seen, however, that a
corresponding drive is not required when the rein-forcer is
generalized. Domination may be reinforcing and hence very
important as a controlling variable. A man may come to
dominate "for the sake of dominating," just as the miser
collects money for its own sake. But apparently there is no
independent deprivation or satiation concerned with
domination itself. To deprive a man of domination would
mean to arrange circumstances in which he dominated
neither physical nature nor society, but under such
circumstances he would presumably suffer other deprivations,
to which any general strengthening of his behavior could then
be attributed. Conversely, when we change a man's behavior
by "letting him have

154

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

his own way," we may appear to be satiating his "need for
domination," but we almost certainly also change some
primary deprivations or some of the aversive conditions to be
described in Chapter XI. The surprisingly general effect of
many specific satiations or deprivations makes the generality
of the drive to dominate questionable. A man who tends to
dominate in many walks of life may undergo an extensive
change as the result of a successful marriage or, on a shorter
time scale, a satisfying meal.
Attempts to reduce all human motivation to a single need
for approval, affection, and so on, are subject to the same
criticism.
Which drive is strongest? Is the maternal drive stronger
than sex? Is sex stronger than hunger? We might answer
questions of this sort by bringing some arbitrarily chosen
response under the control of different deprivations (by
reinforcing it in different ways) and then observing the
maximal frequency under extreme values of each. How does the
rate at which an extremely hungry male rat emits a response
which is reinforced with food on a given schedule compare
with the rate of the same rat under extreme sexual
deprivation when the response has been reinforced on the
same schedule with access to a receptive female? But there is
little point in comparing deprivations unless situations arise
naturally in which the relative magnitudes of their effects are
important. By depriving an organism of both food and sexual
contact, we can observe which behavior emerges when
appropriate stimuli are presented together. These conditions
are not easily satisfied, however. Many organisms suffering
severe water deprivation cannot eat dry food; when we limit
the ingestion of water, therefore, we create an effect similar
to that of satiation with food. In the same way, sexual
behavior is weakened when an organism is severely deprived
of food for a long time.
TIME AS A VARIABLE
The mere emission of behavior is sometimes satiating, and
we then "deprive" the organism simply by making the
behavior impossible. As we have seen, the "need for
exercise" shows this pattern: the organism confined within
narrow limits is more than usually active when the limits are
first removed. The behavior which ensues reduces

DEPRIVATION AND SATIATION

155

the level of activity as a form of satiation. When the
behavior is possible at all times, it shows a periodicity. If a
rat is confined in a small cage and given continuous access
to a running-wheel, its behavior in the wheel may be taken
as a fair measure of its activity. A rat usually alternates
between active and inactive phases with considerable
regularity. A similar periodicity is seen when an interchange
with the environment is not restricted—as in eating,
drinking, or behaving sexually under conditions of unlimited
opportunity. When the period can be established, we may
use time as an independent variable in predicting the
behavior.
A fairly drastic periodic change is exemplified by sleeping
and waking. During sleep, much of the activity of the
organism reaches an extremely low point. This is not all that
happens, however. We may conveniently regard sleep as a
special form of behavior which occurs periodically and with
fair regularity in the lives of most organisms. Usually, the
periodicity coincides with the night-day cycle, with obvious
advantages. We deprive an organism of sleep by preventing
the behavior—for example, we keep it on a slowly revolving
platform where it must move constantly in order to keep
from falling into a tank of water. The tendency to sleep
increases as a function of this deprivation. Just as we induce
a child to eat more readily at mealtime by making sure that
he does not eat between meals, so we induce him to go to
bed at night by making sure that he does not sleep during the
day. To some extent we may also satiate an organism with
sleep. We do this when we send a child to bed early to
prepare him for a particularly long or exhausting day. Under
unrestricted conditions, the periodicity of sleeping and
waking permits us to use time as a variable in predicting
behavior.
Time appears to be the principal experimental variable in
certain slower periodic changes. Behavior during the
menstrual cycle is an example. This may be altered by
administering hormones or in other ways, but our principal
opportunity to predict a given response lies in studying such
cyclic changes. Strength cannot be changed by interfering in
a cycle, as in activity or sleep, because the periodicity is not
the result of automatic deprivation and satiation. Time as a
variable cannot be manipulated experimentally.

156

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

Many behavioral changes, especially in the instinctive
behavior of lower organisms, follow an annual cycle.
Migratory patterns, for example, coincide fairly accurately
with the seasons of the year. Some condition varying with
time may be more important than time itself, We can
interfere with the normal periodicity by, so to speak,
changing the season—by keeping the organism at a
temperature or lengin of day characteristic of a different
time of year. If the behavior responds to the unseasonal
condition, the mere passage of time can scarcely be the
primary variable. Under normal conditions the time of year
may be an important bit of information.
When changes in behavior extend over longer periods, we
speak of the independent variable as the age of the
organism. A response may appear at a given age and later
disappear. The increase in probability as a function of age is
often spoken of as maturation. We achieve some degree of
prediction by discovering these developmental schedules.
Various forms of so-called instinctive behavior, especially in
species other than man, usually appear at characteristic ages,
and the age may be our only useful variable. Since these
changes are usually not cyclic, prediction must be made on
the basis of information obtained with other organisms.
Individual differences may be great; we cannot predict
accurately when an individual will engage in a certain kind
of sexual behavior by establishing the average age of onset
in a population. Usually, therefore, practical problems of
this kind are not solved by appeal to schedules of
maturation. Certain instructional procedures are most
effective when a child is ready for them, but in planning an
educational program for young children chronological age
may be of little value in determining readiness. The
presence or absence of the relevant behavior may have to be
determined by direct observation of each child.
THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SPECIES
At any given time in its life, an individual displays certain
behavior in certain states of probability. This is the
background against which we study selected operants and
explore the effects of independent variables. These variables
are seldom relevant in accounting for the existence of the
behavior chosen for study; they merely affect

DEPRIVATION AND SATIATION

157

its probability. Its existence is taken for granted. When
we examine different individuals, however, we find
certain differences in behavior —in their repertoires, in
the frequencies with which given responses are emitted,
and in the extent to which the behavior responds to
reinforcement, deprivation, and other operations.
Between species these differences may be very large.
The concept of "instinct" has been used to account for
them. Behavior which is characteristic of a species is
attributed to an instinct (of uncertain location or
properties) said to be possessed by all members of the
species. This is a flagrant example of an explanatory
fiction. The term, like "drive," may be given respectable
scientific status by being defined as a tendency to
respond in a way which is characteristic of a species, but
so defined it cannot be used as an explanation. If the
instinct of nest-building refers only to the observed
tendency of certain kinds of birds to build nests, it
cannot explain why the birds build nests.
A tendency of the members of species to behave in a
certain way is no more remarkable than a tendency to
exhibit certain features of anatomy and internal
physiology. Behavior is as much a part of the organism
as are its anatomical features. Species-status itself is a
variable to be taken into account in evaluating the
probability of any kind of behavior. Since we cannot
change the species of an organism, the variable is of no
importance in extending our control, but information
about species-status enables us to predict characteristic
behavior and, in turn, to make more successful use of
other techniques of control.
The problem of individual differences within the
species must be solved in the same way. If we are
interested in sexual behavior, for example, we cannot
make use of probabilities characteristic of a species
unless we know where our subject stands in the
population. The individual capacity or level of ability is
the same kind of datum as species-status itself. We
arrive at species-status as a relevant variable by
surveying the incidence of a particular form of behavior
in the species; we arrive at the position of the individual
in the species by a similar survey of characteristic
tendencies. The problem of individual differences will be
discussed again in Chapter XIII.

158

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

SUMMARY
We may summarize the kinds of independent variables
considered in this chapter by listing the questions which we
must answer in order to account for the probability of a
response.
1. Is the behavior in question characteristic of the species
to which the individual belongs?
2. If so, is the current age of the individual within the
range in which the behavior is observed?
3. If the behavior varies considerably between
individuals, what is the relative position of the individual we
are studying?
4. If the behavior shows any long-range cyclic change,
what is the current position of the individual in the cycle? If
the cycle can be shown to correspond to a change in some
external condition—for example, the mean temperature—
this variable may permit a more explicit prediction and may
possibly be useful in control.
5. If the behavior shows cyclic changes on a smaller scale
—for example, a diurnal change—at what time are we to
predict or control the response? If we are dealing with a
nocturnal animal, for example, and if the day-night cycle is a
part of our experimental conditions, then we must note the
time of day.
6. What is the history of the individual with respect to
sleep? If there has been no interference with sleep, what is
the present point in the cycle? If the organism has been
deprived of or satiated with sleep, how has this been done?
7. What is the history of the organism with respect to
relevant deprivations and satiations? If the behavior in which
we are interested is conditioned, to what deprivation was the
reinforcement related? What is the recent history of this
deprivation? In studying behavior which is characteristically
reinforced with food, we must have some record of the
history of ingestion or some contemporary measure, such as
body weight, which varies with that history. We must also
know whether any variable in the recent history of the
organism—for example, the administration of a drug—has
had an effect similar to that of deprivation or satiation.
There are other variables of which the behavior may be a
function.

DEPRIVATION AND SATIATION

159

Reinforcement has not been included in the list, and we
have still to consider other variables in the fields of emotion,
aversive stimulation, and punishment. All in all, therefore, the
list may seem dishearteningly long. In actual practice,
however, many of these conditions are easily arranged. In
routine laboratory research it is not difficult to set up a
procedure which assures considerable stability from day to
day with respect to most or all of them. We can then study a
very few variables at a time. In practical applications as well,
many of the points which have just been raised prove to be
trivial. The effective variables are easily isolated.

CHAPTER X

EMOTION

WHAT IS AN EMOTION?
The "emotions" are excellent examples of the
fictional causes to which we commonly attribute behavior.
We run away because of "fear" and strike because of
"anger"; we are paralyzed by "rage" and depressed by
"grief." These causes are in turn attributed to events in our
history or present circumstances—to the things which
frighten or enrage us or make us angry or sad. The behavior,
the emotion, and the prior external event comprise the three
links of our familiar causal chain. The middle link may be
taken to be either psychic or physiological. In the psychic
case, it is argued that an external circumstance makes an
individual feel emotional and that the feeling leads him to
take appropriate action. The famous James-Lange theory—
developed by the American psychologist William James and
the Danish physician C. G. Lange—asserted, however, that
one did not feel the inner cause of emotion, but simply some
part of the emotional behavior itself. James cast this
assertion in classical form by saying "that we feel sorry
because we cry, angry because we strike, afraid because we
tremble, and not that we cry, strike, or tremble because we
are sorry, angry, or fearful, as the case may be." This theory
emphasized the study of the physiological
160

EMOTION

161

changes which we "feel" in emotion and to some extent identified
the psychic middle link with the physiological. The most obvious
changes which are present when the layman says he "feels an
emotion" are the responses of smooth muscles and glands—for
example, blushing, blanching, weeping, sweating, salivating, and
contracting the small muscles in the skin which produce goose flesh
in man and elevate the fur of animals. Many of these are familiar
in the form recorded by the "lie detector," which detects, not
dishonesty, but the emotional responses generated when the
individual engages in behavior for which he has previously been
punished.
In spite of extensive research it has not been possible to show that
each emotion is distinguished by a particular pattern of responses of
glands and smooth muscles. Although there are a few characteristic
patterns of such responses, the differences between emotions are
often not great and do not follow the usual distinctions. Nor are such
responses diagnostic of emotion in general, since they also occur
under other circumstances—for example, after heavy exercise or in a
chill wind.
Certain responses executed by the facial and postural muscles are
commonly said to "express" emotion. Laughing, growling, snarling,
baring the teeth, and the muscular responses which accompany the
secretion of tears are examples. The lower organisms generally have
a more extensive repertoire of this sort. Emotional expressions can
be imitated by operant behavior, as in the theater, and are frequently
modified by the social environment to conform to cultural
specifications. To some extent a given culture has its own way of
laughing, its own cries of pain, and so on. It has not been possible to
specify given sets of expressive responses as characteristic of
particular emotions, and in any case such responses are not said to
be the emotion.
In the search for what is happening "in emotion" the scientist has
found himself at a peculiar disadvantage. Where the layman
identifies and classifies emotions not only with ease but with
considerable consistency, the scientist in focusing upon responses
of glands and smooth muscles and upon expressive behavior has not
been sure that he could tell the difference between even such
relatively gross emotions as anger and fear. Some means of
identification available to the

162

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

layman appears to have been overlooked. The layman does
not say that a man is angry simply because the small blood
vessels enlarge so that he becomes red or because his pulse
accelerates, or because certain muscles set his jaw and lips in
a position reminiscent of the snarl of the uncivilized animal.
All of this may happen "without emotion," and the layman
frequently judges a man to be angry when he has no
knowledge of such responses whatsoever—for example, when
he says that the writer of a letter must have been angry when
he wrote it. He knows that a companion is afraid as he
walks with her through a dark street even though he does
not see her turning pale or know that the secretion of her
digestive juices has been suppressed or that her pulse has
accelerated. Under other circumstances all of this might be
happening when he would not call her afraid at all.
EMOTION AS PREDISPOSITION
When the man in the street says that someone is afraid or
angry or in love, he is generally talking about predispositions
to act in certain ways. The "angry" man shows an increased
probability of striking, insulting, or otherwise inflicting
injury and a lowered probability of aiding, favoring,
comforting, or making love. The man "in love" shows an
increased tendency to aid, favor, be with, and caress and a
lowered tendency to injure in any way. "In fear" a man tends
to reduce or avoid contact with specific stimuli—as by
running away, hiding, or covering his eyes and ears; at the
same time he is less likely to advance toward such stimuli or
into unfamiliar territory. These are useful facts, and
something like the layman's mode of classification has a
place in a scientific analysis.
The names of the so-called emotions serve to classify
behavior with respect to various circumstances which affect
its probability. The safest practice is to hold to the adjectival
form. Just as the hungry organism can be accounted for
without too much difficulty, although "hunger" is another
matter, so by describing behavior as fearful, affectionate,
timid, and so on, we are not led to look for things called
emotions. The common idioms, "in love," "in fear," and "in
anger," suggest a definition of an emotion as a conceptual
state, in which a special response is a function of
circumstances in the history of the

EMOTION

163

individual. In casual discourse and for many scientific purposes
some such way of referring to current strength in terms of the
variables of which it is a function is often desirable. But so
defined, an emotion, like a drive, is not to be identified with
physiological or psychic conditions.
THE RESPONSES WHICH
VARY TOGETHER IN
EMOTION
We have no guarantee that the vocabulary of the layman
will survive unchanged in a scientific study. In the following
discussion, however, terms taken from casual discourse are used
to refer to familiar observations and to point up certain
essential problems.
Some emotions—joy and sorrow, for example—involve the
whole repertoire of the organism. We recognize this when we
say that an emotion is exciting or depressing. Some emotions
involve the whole repertoire, but in more specific ways.
Probably no behavior remains unchanged when the organism
becomes afraid or angry, but responses related to specific
features of the environment (the "object" of the fear or anger)
are especially affected. Some of the milder emotions, such as
embarrassment, sympathy, and amusement, may be localized
more narrowly in small subdivisions of a repertoire.
Responses which vary together in an emotion do so in part
because of a common consequence. The responses which grow
strong in anger inflict damage upon persons or objects. This
process is often biologically useful when an organism
competes with other organisms or struggles with the
inanimate world. The grouping of responses which define anger
thus depends in part upon conditioning. Behavior which inflicts
damage is reinforced in anger and is subsequently controlled
by the conditions which control anger. Just as food is
reinforcing to a hungry organism, so damage inflicted upon
another is reinforcing to an angry one. Just as a hungry man
exclaims "Good!" when he receives food, so the angry man
exclaims "Good!" when his opponent is damaged in any way.
Some of the behavior involved in an emotion is apparently
unconditioned, however, and in that case the grouping must be
explained in terms of evolutionary consequences. For example,
in some species

164

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

biting, striking, and clawing appear to be strengthened
during anger before conditioning can have taken place.
These responses generate cries of pain and other evidences
of damage which then reinforce other responses to bring
them within the class of "angry behavior." For example, if
an angry child attacks, bites, or strikes another child—all
without prior conditioning—and if the other child cries or
runs away, then these same consequences may reinforce
other behavior of the angry child which can scarcely be
innate—for example, teasing the other child, taking toys
away from him, destroying his work, or calling him names.
The adult possesses a full-fledged repertoire of obviously
conditioned verbal responses which inflict injury, all of
which are strong "in anger" and co-vary with unconditioned
behavior as a function of the same variables.
EMOTIONAL OPERATIONS
We discover the variables of which emotional states are a
function—as we discover any variables—by looking for
them. Many cases are familiar. A sudden loud noise often
induces "fear." Continued physical restraint or other
interference with behavior may generate "rage." Failure to
receive an accustomed reinforcement is a special case of
restraint which generates a kind of rage called "frustration."
Behavior which has frequently been punished may be
emitted in a form called "timid" or "embarrassed." We must
not expect too much, however, from these everyday terms.
They have grown out of circumstances which emphasize
typical cases and have never been tested under conditions
which require precise definition. Even an apparently wellmarked emotion like anger may not be reducible to a single
class of responses or attributable to a single set of
operations. The anger produced by one circumstance may
not be the same as that produced by another. Again, the
interruption of an established sequence of responses usually
has an emotional effect, but when one cannot write a letter
because a pen is missing or cannot open a door because it is
bolted on the other side or cannot converse with someone
who is totally deaf or does not speak the same language, the
resulting effects may differ in as many ways as the
circumstances differ. To group them all together as
"frustrating conditions" and to describe

EMOTION

165

all the changes in behavior as "rage" is a misleading
simplification. The recognition of mixed emotions suggests
that the usual classification makes distinctions which do not
always correspond to the facts.
The subtle emotions are still more difficult. The condition
which the layman calls loneliness, for example, appears to be
a mild form of frustration due to the interruption of an
established sequence of responses which have been positively
reinforced by the social environment. The lonely man has no
one to talk to. No matter where he turns, powerful behavior
has no chance to be effective. Loneliness which is due to the
absence of a single person who has supplied reinforcement in
the form of affection may be especially profound, as the
lovesick individual demonstrates. The loneliness of the amiable
man who finds himself among strangers for a long time will
be of a different character. A child lost in a large crowd suffers in
still a different way: all the behavior which has been
previously reinforced by the appearance of his mother or
father now fails; he looks about but does not see them; he calls
and cries, but they do not answer. Depending upon a variety
of circumstances, the result may be close to fear or rage or
sorrow. At the moment there appears to be no over-all
classification which will be applicable to all these examples.
We have noted that the fields of motivation and emotion are
very close. They may, indeed, overlap. Any extreme
deprivation probably acts as an emotional operation. The
starving man is almost necessarily frustrated and afraid.
Nostalgia includes both a drive and an emotion. If we
remove a man from his characteristic surroundings, a large
part of his social behavior cannot be emitted and may
therefore become more and more probable: he will return to
his old surroundings whenever possible and will be particularly
"sociable" when he does so. Other parts of his behavior
become strong because they are automatically reinforced under
the prevailing deprivation; he will talk to anyone who will
listen about his old surroundings, his old friends, and what
he used to do. This is all a result of deprivation. But
nostalgia is also an emotional condition in which there is a
general weakening of other forms of behavior—a
"depression," which may be quite profound. We cannot
classify this as the result of deprivation because the behavior
which is thus affected has not been

166

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

specifically restrained. Distinctions of this sort may seem a
little forced, but they are worth making whenever we are
interested in understanding or altering such conditions.
THE TOTAL EMOTION
We define an emotion—insofar as we wish to do so—as a
particular state of strength or weakness in one or more
responses induced by any one of a class of operations. We
may make as many distinctions as we wish between separate
emotions, although this endeavor usually exhausts itself in the
endless number of distinctions which are actually possible.
Methods and practices are available for surveying the effects
of any given operation in which we may be interested, and a
statement of the relation appears to leave nothing of
importance out of account. The reflex responses which
accompany many of these states of strength are not to be
completely disregarded. They may not help us to refine our
distinctions, but they add characteristic details to the final
picture of the effect of a given emotional circumstance. In
describing the fact that criticism of his work "makes an
employee mad," for example, we may report: (1) that he
turns red, that the palms of his hands sweat, and, if the
evidence is available, that he stops digesting his lunch; (2)
that his face takes on a characteristic "expression" of anger;
and (3) that he tends to slam doors, to kick the cat, to speak
curtly to his fellow workers, to get into a fight, and to watch a
street fight or boxing match with special interest. The
operant behavior under (3) appears to hang together via a
common consequence—someone or something is damaged.
The "total emotion"—if this is of any importance—is the total
effect of the criticism of his work upon his behavior.
The so-called phobias provide extreme examples. Phobias are
generally named after the circumstances which give rise to the
emotional condition: in claustrophobia, for example, a possibly
violent change in behavior is the result of confining the
organism in a small space; in agoraphobia a similar effect
follows from placing the organism in a large, open space.
Many phobias are generated by more specific circumstances:
a man with otherwise normal behavior may show an excessive
fear of dead birds, for example. How should we describe the

EMOTION

167

latter "emotion"? We could probably show that the unexpected
sight of a dead bird elicits very considerable reflex responses—
blanching, sweating, change of pulse rate, and so on, as well as
various expressions executed by the musculature of the face
and body. If this were the extent of the phobia, we could give
a complete description of it as a set of conditioned reflexes
evoked by sight of a dead bird, but there are other important
effects. The behavior of escape will be very powerful. Some of
this—such as turning or running away—may be
unconditioned or conditioned very early in the history of the
organism. Some of it—calling upon someone to take the bird
away, for example—is obviously of later origin. The rest of the
repertoire undergoes a general change. If our subject was in the
course of eating his dinner, we observe that he stops eating or
eats less rapidly. If he was engaged in some other task, we
observe a change which might be described as "losing
interest." We see that he is more likely to jump at sudden
noises and to look about him cautiously upon entering new
territory. He will be less likely to talk at a natural rate, to
laugh, to joke, and so on. He will be predisposed to "see" a
dead bird in place of an old hat lying on the ground, in the
sense that this stimulus, which to some extent resembles a
dead bird, may reinstate all the emotional conditions just
described. These changes may persist for a considerable period
of time after the stimulus has been removed. A complete
account of the phobia would need to refer to all of them, and
this would obviously require a description of the whole
behavioral repertoire of the individual.
EMOTIONS ARE NOT CAUSES
As long as we conceive of the problem of emotion as one
of inner states, we are not likely to advance a practical
technology. It does not help in the solution of a practical
problem to be told that some feature of a man's behavior is
due to frustration or anxiety; we also need to be told how the
frustration or anxiety has been induced and how it may be
altered. In the end, we find ourselves dealing with two events—
the emotional behavior and the manipulable conditions of
which that behavior is a function—which comprise the
proper subject matter of the study of emotion.

168

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

There are certain cases in which three separate stages can
be identified. A chronic emotional condition sometimes
leads to certain forms of illness. For example, a man whose
business is failing may be subject to a long series of
circumstances which generate a chronic condition of
frustration or anxiety. Part of the total emotion may be
reflex responses in the alimentary tract, as a result of which
the man may become physically ill—he may develop ulcers,
for example. Here it is legitimate to attribute the illness to an
"emotion" as a cause, because we define the emotion as a
pattern of behavior. We might in the same way attribute a
cracked skull to emotion if the injury was suffered as the
result of reckless behavior. But this is very different from
arguing that emotional behavior is due to an emotion. A man
does not neglect his business because of anxiety or worry.
Such a statement is at best merely a way of classifying a
particular kind of neglect. The only valid cause is the
external condition of which the behavior of neglect, as part
of an emotional pattern known as anxiety or worry, can be
shown to be a function. A similar neglect which might be
attributed to a preoccupying love affair would not be "due to
a different emotion," it would simply be the effect of a
different set of circumstances. In order to remedy the
neglectful behavior in either case, we must attack the
external circumstances which are responsible for it.
The behavior observed during an emotion is not to be
confused with emotion as a hypothetical "state," any more
than eating is to be confused with hunger. An angry man,
like a hungry man, shows a disposition to act in a certain
way. He may never act in that way, but we may nevertheless
deal with the probability that he will do so. Just as we infer
from a history of deprivation that a man is probably hungry
even though he is unable to eat, so we infer that he is
probably angry by showing that he generally behaves in an
angry fashion upon similar occasions. Just as we infer that a
man is hungry from his preoccupation with displays of food,
so we infer that he is angry because of relatively
unimportant responses which co-vary in that emotion. In
neither of these cases need our subject emit the important
ultimate behavior for which he is predisposed.
The layman makes a further distinction between an
emotion and

EMOTION

169

a predisposition toward emotion. He speaks of the latter as a
mood when the state is temporary ("He is in a jolly mood")
and as a disposition when it is of longer standing ("He has a
mean disposition"). Moods and dispositions represent a kind
of second-order probability—the probability that a given
circumstance will raise the probability of a given response.
THE PRACTICAL USE OF EMOTION
Emotional behavior and the conditions which generate it are
most easily examined when they are put to practical use.
Sometimes we wish to elicit the reflexes which commonly
occur in emotion. Reflexes, as we have seen, cannot be
executed upon demand as "voluntary behavior." The poet
who exclaims, "Oh, weep for Adonais!" does not actually
expect the reader to respond in this way upon request. There
is no interpersonal relationship which permits one person to
evoke emotional behavior in another according to this
formula. The only possibility is to use an eliciting stimulus,
either conditioned or unconditioned. The "tear-jerker," as we
have noted, is a piece of writing which is designed literally to
induce the secretion of tears. Other verbal repertoires are
designed to evoke laughter. The use of conditioned stimuli to
elicit emotional responses in this way is of great practical
importance to professional entertainers.
When we wish to eliminate responses of this sort, we adopt
procedures appropriate to the conditioned reflex. When we
control a companion's tendency to laugh upon a solemn
occasion by drawing his attention away from a funny event,
we simply remove the stimulus for laughter. When we achieve
the same effect by kicking him in the shins, we simply
present the stimulus for an incompatible response. Practical
use is also made of certain drugs which induce or eliminate
emotional reactions. For example, in the military services a
drug which reduces the responses characteristic of anxiety or
fear is obviously of great value under battle conditions.
Frequently it is also desirable to change emotional
predispositions. In a "pep talk" a coach may take advantage
of the fact that players exert themselves more aggressively
against their opponents if they have been made angry. The
skilled cross-examiner may use the same

170

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

procedure to lead a witness to emit verbal responses which
would otherwise be withheld. Soldiers and civilian
populations are aroused to aggressive action with stories of
atrocities, reminders of present or past injuries, and so on.
Since individual histories are involved, the effective
operations are to be found, not in a theoretical analysis, but in
a study of each case as it arises; a clear understanding of
what is being done, however, may make such practices more
effective.
A particularly important emotional predisposition is that in
which the individual favors a particular person, group, or state
of affairs. It is hard to define the particular consequences of
"favorable" behavior, but a fairly specific effect can often be
discovered. A politician may arrange political rallies, kiss
babies, publish favorable autobiographical details, and so on,
only to strengthen one very specific response on the part of the
electorate—placing a mark on a ballot opposite his name. An
author or playwright generates favorable responses toward his
characters by depicting them in situations which strengthen
such behavior or which counteract opposing, unfavorable
behavior, and in this way he increases the chances that his book
or play will be "liked"; but the behavior at issue may be
nothing more than the purchase of books or tickets or the
spreading of favorable reports. Part of the effect here is
reinforcement, but we may also distinguish a kind of
operation which must be classed as emotional. The advertiser
interested in generating "good will" for his product employs
the same procedures, where the specific behavior at issue is
the purchase of the product.

CHAPTER XI

AVERSION,
AVOIDANCE, ANXIETY

AVERSIVE BEHAVIOR
The kind of stimuli which are usually called
unpleasant, annoying, or, more technically, aversive are not
distinguished by particular physical specifications. Very
strong stimuli are often aversive, but some weak stimuli are
aversive also. Many aversive stimuli damage tissue or
otherwise threaten the well-being of the individual, but this
is not always true. Painful stimuli are generally aversive, but
not necessarily so—as a counterirritant shows. Stimuli
which have acquired their aversive power in the process of
conditioning are especially unlikely to possess identifying
physical properties. A stimulus is known to be aversive only
if its removal is reinforcing. In Chapter V such a stimulus
was called a negative reinforcer. We define both positive and
negative reinforcers in terms of the strengthening of a
response. What happens when a positive reinforcer is
withdrawn or a negative reinforcer presented will not be
considered until the following chapter.
Behavior which is followed by the withdrawal of an
aversive stimulus is called escape. We weaken an aversive
noise by putting fingers in our ears, by moving away from
the source, by closing intervening
171

172

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

doors or windows, by stopping it at the source, and so on.
Similarly, we escape from a bright light by shutting our eyes,
turning our head away, or turning off the light. We cannot
say that these responses are positively reinforced with
"freedom from" noise, light, and so on, since it is the change
from one situation to another which is effective, and this is the
reduction of a condition prevailing before reinforcement.
In the laboratory we condition a rat to press a lever by
reducing the intensity of a light when it does so. The level of
illumination is critical. A weak light may be ineffective and a
very strong light may lead to aversive behavior acquired
earlier in the history of the rat, such as shutting the eyes or
covering the head with other parts of the body. A loud noise or
a light shock delivered through the floor of the box is less
likely to evoke previously established aversive behavior, but
the use of such stimuli is complicated by other factors.
Aversive stimuli elicit reflexes and generate emotional
predispositions which often interfere with the operant to be
strengthened. It is then difficult to observe the effect of
negative reinforcement alone.
Aversive stimuli are often used, both in the laboratory and
in the practical control of behavior, because of the immediacy
of the result. When we present an aversive stimulus, any
behavior which has previously been conditioned by the
withdrawal of the stimulus immediately follows, and the
possibility of conditioning other behavior is immediately
provided. The presentation of the aversive stimulus
therefore resembles a sudden increase in deprivation (Chapter
IX); but since deprivation and satiation differ in many
respects from the presentation or removal of an aversive
stimulus, it is advisable to consider the two kinds of
operations separately. We study aversive behavior in
accordance with our definition: by presenting an aversive
stimulus, we create the possibility of reinforcing a response by
withdrawing the stimulus. When conditioning has already
taken place, the aversive stimulus provides an immediate
mode of control.
Hunger pangs are a possible source of confusion between
deprivation and aversive stimulation. Since hunger is the
commonest drive, we have tended to model our formulation
of all drives upon it. But we have seen that pangs are not
representative of drives in general

AVERSION, AVOIDANCE, ANXIETY

173

and that, even in the case of hunger, they call for a separate
formulation. Insofar as one eats in order to reduce hunger
pangs, the behavior is aversive. Whether pangs ever lead to
eating before negative reinforcement has taken place would
be difficult to determine, since pangs are produced by the
very conditions which produce a heightened probability of
eating regardless of the presence or absence of pangs. It is
possible, however, to separate the producing of pangs from
the increase in likelihood that eating will take place. When
stimulation which resembles a hunger pang arises from other
sources —for example, an inflammation—aversive eating may
take place without deprivation. On the other hand, when we
drink water, chew an indigestible substance, or take certain
drugs in order to reduce hunger pangs, we are emitting
behavior which otherwise may not vary with food
deprivation. Similarly, although an individual may engage
in certain sex practices because they reduce the time wasted
in other sexual preoccupations, it does not follow that this
result or the reduction of any other aversive consequence is
essential to the normal variation in sexual behavior with
deprivation or satiation.
Just as we did not define a positive reinforcer as pleasant
or satisfying, so in defining a negative reinforcer in terms of
its power to reinforce when withdrawn we do not assert that
the stimulus is unpleasant or annoying. It would be as
difficult to show that the reinforcing power of an aversive
stimulus is due to its unpleasantness as to show that the
reinforcing power of a positive reinforcer is due to its
pleasantness. The arguments given in Chapter V on this
point could be repeated step by step for the negative case.
There is also a parallel explanation in terms of biological
significance. It is not difficult to show that an organism
which is reinforced by the withdrawal of certain conditions
should have an advantage in natural selection.
Conditioned aversive stimuli. The formula of stimulus
substitution applies to the function of negative
reinforcement. Neutral events which accompany or precede
established negative reinforcements become negatively
reinforcing. Thus we move to escape from an annoying or
offensive person even though he is not annoying or
offensive at the moment. The so-called cures for smoking
and drinking mentioned in Chapter IV follow this formula.
By pairing the taste

174

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

of tobacco or alcohol with a condition of nausea, the aversive
behavior appropriate to nausea, perhaps including vomiting, is
transferred to the tobacco or alcohol.
THE PRACTICAL USE OF AVERSIVE STIMULI
We use negative reinforcement in several different ways. An
aversive stimulus which has already been withdrawn to reinforce
a desired operant offers, as we have seen, an immediate mode
of control. One boy holds another on the ground until the
victim cries "Uncle." An arm is twisted until a gun is
dropped. A horse is whipped until it moves at a given speed.
We use conditioned aversive stimuli in the same way—when,
for example, we "shame" someone into acting. The boy who
does not dive from the high board is called a sissy; and he can
escape from this conditioned verbal stimulus only by diving
His companions present the stimulus to increase the
probability that he will dive. "Daring" is a similar practice.
(The inverse case, as we shall see in the next chapter, is to
prevent behavior from occurring by branding it shameful.
Shameful behavior is behavior which one may be "shamed
out of." Escape from the aversive shame is achieved by not
engaging in the behavior or, more obviously, by engaging in
conspicuously incompatible behavior.)
We extend the effectiveness of the technique when we
condition behavior so that future aversive stimuli will have an
effect. We may plan to present these stimuli upon later
occasions, or we may simply prepare for them whenever they
may occur. Conditioning is an important stage in the
exploiting of aversive control in ethics, religion, and
government, as we shall see in Section V.
We also condition aversive stimuli in order to provide for
negative reinforcement. A neutral stimulus which is likely to
occur on some later occasion is made aversive by being
paired with aversive stimuli. Escape is then automatically
reinforced. For example, the spread of venereal disease is to
some extent controlled by educational programs which
provide for the future reinforcement of aversive behavior to
prostitutes or "easy pickups." Descriptions or pictures of such
people are paired with aversive information about venereal
disease. One result is a strong emotional response at the

AVERSION, AVOIDANCE, ANXIETY

175

sight of a prostitute which may be effective from the point
of view of the educational program by being incompatible
with sexual behavior: the individual may be too frightened
to participate. To this extent the effect is emotional rather
than aversive. Another object of such a program, however, is
to guarantee the reinforcement of aversive behavior. When
the individual looks away, turns away, or walks away from
the prostitute, his behavior will be reinforced by the
reduction of a conditioned aversive stimulus.
An important example of this use of aversive conditioning
is the practice of branding an act wrong or sinful. Any
behavior which reduces the stimulation arising from the
early stages of such an act is then negatively reinforced. A
single pairing of two stimuli may be sufficient to transfer
aversive power, and a conditioned reinforcer may continue
to be effective long after the basic unconditioned reinforcers have disappeared from the environment. Many
problems in psychotherapy arise from the strength and
duration of this effect, as we shall see in Chapter XXIV.
The withdrawal of a positive reinforcer has by definition
the same effect as the presentation of a negative. Taking
away privileges is not very different from establishing
aversive conditions. We occasionally remove a positive
reinforcer for practical purposes. What is removed is, more
precisely, a conditioned positive reinforcer—a discriminative
stimulus or, in other words, the occasion for successful
action. There are several subtle distinctions here which are
perhaps more important for the theory of behavior than for
its practical control. Suppose we have deprived a man of
permission to leave a military camp until a certain task has
been performed, and suppose that upon past occasions the
performance of similar tasks has been followed by the
restoration of this privilege. Have we generated a state of
deprivation, in which behavior which has been reinforced by
the return of privileges will be strong, or have we presented
an aversive condition from which the individual can escape
only by performing the required task? It is possible, of
course, that we have done both. Practically, the distinction
may appear to be of little importance, but certain collateral
results depend upon the extent to which each is involved.

176

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

AVOIDANCE
Escaping from an aversive condition is clearly not the
same as avoiding it, since the aversive condition which is
avoided does not directly affect the organism. Although
avoidance suggests that behavior may be influenced by an
event which does not occur, we may account for the. effect
without violating any fundamental principle of science with
the concept of conditioned negative reinforcement. In
avoidance the conditioned and unconditioned aversive
stimuli are separated by an appreciable interval of time. The
required temporal relation is commonly encountered in
nature. A rapidly approaching object precedes painful
contact. The sputter of the fuse precedes the explosion of the
firecracker. The sound of the dentist's drill precedes painful
stimulation in the tooth. The interval separating the two
stimuli may be definitely fixed, or it may vary widely. In any
case, the individual comes to execute behavior which
prevents the occurrence or reduces the magnitude of the
second stimulus. He dodges the object, puts his fingers in
his ears to soften the sound of the explosion, and jerks his
head away from the drill. Why?
When stimuli occur in this order, the first stimulus
becomes a conditioned negative reinforcer, and henceforth
any action which reduces it is strengthened through operant
conditioning. When we avoid the painful stimulation of the
tooth, we merely escape from the sound of the drill. That the
behavior of avoidance appears to be "directed" toward a
future event may be explained as in operant behavior in
general: it is always past occurrences of conditioned negative
reinforcers and past instances of their reduction which are
responsible for the probability of the escape response. The
fact that the future event does not occur when the behavior
is emitted would raise a puzzling issue if the behavior did in
fact continue in strength. But if an occasion for avoidance
behavior arises often enough, the conditioned aversive
situation grows progressively weaker. The behavior is no
longer reinforced, and eventually not emitted. When this
happens, the primary negative reinforcer is received. A single
instance may suffice to recondition the reinforcing power of
the earlier stimulus. Thus when certain visual stimuli
generated by a rapidly approach-

AVERSION, AVOIDANCE, ANXIETY

177

ing object are followed by injury, any behavior which
converts the stimuli into more harmless forms will be
strengthened. Moving out of the way, dodging, and putting
up a guard are cases in point. By virtue of these responses
the individual is successful in avoiding injury, but he is
reinforced only in escaping from the conditioned aversive
stimuli which we call the "threat" of injury. If injury is
always avoided, the threat grows weaker, and the behavior is
less and less strongly reinforced. Eventually a response is not
made, an injury is received, and the visual pattern is reestablished as a negative rein-forcer. Similarly, if the
stimulation incidental to the eating of a particular food
always precedes a severe allergic headache, it may become
aversive. As a result the food is not eaten, the headaches do
not occur, and the original conditioning of the negative
reinforcer suffers extinction. Eventually the food is no
longer aversive. When it is eaten again, another headache
occurs, the conditioned negative reinforcer is again
established, and another cycle is begun. The "absence of a
headache" has had an effect upon behavior only in
furthering the extinction of the conditioned aversive
stimulus.
The practical use of a "threat" is familiar to everyone. The
bandit threatens his victim by creating a condition which
has preceded physical injury, and the victim reduces this
threat by turning over his pocketbook. Escape—running away
—may also be highly probable, but it is only the behavior
with respect to the pocketbook which fits the present
formula. A threat is something more than daring or shaming
because of the special temporal relation between conditioned
and unconditioned negative reinforcers. Nothing else
happens if a dare is not taken; the aversive condition simply
continues.
Any stimulus which consistently precedes the aversive
withdrawal of a positive reinforcer may come to act as a
conditioned negative reinforcer. We avoid an aversive
condition when we act to reduce any indication that an
entertaining program will be brought to an end or that any
advantage in a competitive affair will be reduced 01 that we
shall lose the affection or love or services of someone who is
important to us. The behavior reinforced by reducing such
threats will not necessarily be the same as that which is
positively reinforced

178

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

by the entertaining program, by the advantage, or by love,
affection, or services.
ANXIETY
A stimulus which characteristically precedes a strong
negative rein-forcer has a far-reaching effect. It evokes
behavior which has been conditioned by the reduction of
similar threats and also elicits strong emotional responses.
The bandit's victim not only turns over his pocketbook and
displays a high probability of running away, he also
undergoes a violent emotional reaction which is
characteristic of all stimuli leading to avoidance behavior.
One who has been severely seasick will tend to escape from
conditioned aversive stimuli which occur while planning a
trip, while going up the gang-plank, and so on—for
example, he will tend to cancel his trip or turn and rush off
the ship. He will also exhibit strong conditioned reflexes
transferred from the original stimulation of the ship in
motion. Some of these may be simple gastric responses
which we should not call emotional. Others may be of the
sort commonly seen in fear. Operant behavior will be also
markedly changed. The individual may seem
"preoccupied"—which may mean nothing more than that he
is not normally occupied. He may find it impossible to
engage in normal conversation or to attend to the simplest
practical affairs. He may speak curtly and show none of his
usual interests. These are emotional effects upon probability
which might have been considered in Chapter X. They can
occur, however, only when a stimulus characteristically
precedes an aversive stimulus by an interval of time
sufficiently great to permit behavioral changes to be
observed. The condition which results is usually called
anxiety.
Almost every strong aversive stimulus is preceded by a
characteristic stimulus which may come to generate anxiety.
Contingencies of this sort are arranged in the practical
control of behavior, often in connection with punishment.
Although the biological advantage of avoidance is obvious,
the emotional pattern of anxiety appears to serve no useful
purpose. It interferes with the normal behavior of the
individual and may even disorganize avoidance behavior
which would otherwise be effective in dealing with the
circumstances. For this

AVERSION, AVOIDANCE, ANXIETY

179

reason anxiety is an important problem in psychotherapy, as
we shall see in Chapter XXIV. In the design of controlling
techniques the possibility of generating anxiety as an
unfortunate by-product must constantly be kept in mind.
Since conditioning may take place as the result of one
pairing of stimuli, a single aversive event may bring a
condition of anxiety under the control of incidental stimuli.
The sudden death of a close friend, for example, is
sometimes followed by a sustained depression which may
be verbalized as a feeling that "something is going to
happen," as a "feeling of doom," and so on. It is hard to deal
with such a case. When we say that a death was sudden or
occurred without warning, we mean that no prior stimulus
was particularly associated with it. The stimuli which
received the force of the conditioning were therefore the
undistinguished elements of daily life. It is not likely that
there are any successful forms of escape appropriate to these
stimuli, although other forms of escape may, through
induction, be strengthened. Conditioned emotional reflexes,
as well as conditioned emotional predispositions, may be
almost constantly activated. In the case of an "expected"
death—for example, the death of someone who has been ill
for a long time—the event may be equally aversive, but the
anxiety is conditioned to the specific stimuli which precede
it. Anxiety is not so likely to arise again unless these stimuli
are reinstated—for example, through the illness of another
friend.
Although the emotional aspect of anxiety may be
distinguished from the conditioned aversive effect
responsible for avoidance behavior, it is possible that the
emotion is also aversive. Avoidance responses may be
interpreted as in part an escape from the emotional
components of anxiety. Thus we avoid the dentist's office,
not only because it precedes painful stimulation and is
therefore a negative reinforcer, but because, having
preceded such stimulation, it arouses a complex emotional
condition which is also aversive. The total effect may be
extremely powerful. A problem of great military importance
is the behavior of avoiding battle. Malingering, desertion, or
a "nervous breakdown" may reach a very high probability.
Successful preparation of the fighting man requires a clear
understanding of the effect of the stimuli which precede the
more aversive stimuli of com-

180

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

bat. The man may be avoiding, not merely battle, but his
own reactions of anxiety.
ANXIETY AND ANTICIPATION
A counterpart of anxiety arises when a stimulus precedes a
positive reinforcement by an appreciable interval. If an
envelope received through the mail contains bad news, a
similar envelope received later will, before it is opened,
generate the anxiety just described. But envelopes also
contain good news—perhaps a check or the offer of a good
job. Here the avoidance behavior strengthened by bad news
— turning away from the mail box, throwing the envelope
down unopened, losing the envelope before it is opened, and
so on—has its parallel in the increased probability of
looking in the box, opening the letter in haste, and so on.
Emotional reflexes in response to the unopened envelope
will be appropriate to bad news in the one case and to good
news in the other. Instead of responses commonly observed
in grief, sorrow, or fear, we may observe responses
characteristic of elation or joy. Emotional predispositions
also stand in the same polar opposition: the general
depression of activity in the one case is matched by a
general heightening of activity in the other. Instead of
growing silent and reserved, our subject speaks to everyone,
reacts in an exaggerated fashion, walks faster and seemingly
more lightly, and so on. This is particularly obvious in the
behavior of young children—for example, on the eve of a
holiday or festival.
The effect of stimuli which characteristically precede
positive reinforcement may be chronic in a world in which
"good" things frequently happen. It is not seen in the clinic
because it is not troublesome. Anxiety, which is chronic in a
world in which "bad" things frequently happen, has resulting
disadvantages both to the individual and to society.
ANXIETY NOT A CAUSE
Anxiety, as a special case of emotion, should be
interpreted with the usual caution. When we speak of the
effects of anxiety, we imply that the state itself is a cause,
but so far as we are concerned here, the term merely
classifies behavior. It indicates a set of emotional

AVERSION, AVOIDANCE, ANXIETY

181

predispositions attributed to a special kind of circumstance.
Any therapeutic attempt to reduce the "effects of anxiety"
must operate upon these circumstances, not upon any
intervening state. The middle term is of no functional
significance, either in a theoretical analysis or in the
practical control of behavior.

CHAPTER XII

PUNISHMENT
A QUESTIONABLE TECHNIQUE
The commonest technique of control in modern life
is punishment. The pattern is familiar: if a man does not
behave as you wish, knock him down; if a child misbehaves,
spank him; if the people of a country misbehave, bomb them.
Legal and police systems are based upon such punishments
as fines, flogging, incarceration, and hard labor. Religious
control is exerted through penances, threats of
excommunication, and consignment to hell-fire. Education
has not wholly abandoned the birch rod. In everyday
personal contact we control through censure, snubbing,
disapproval, or banishment. In short, the degree to which we
use punishment as a technique of control seems to be
limited only by the degree to which we can gain the
necessary power. All of this is done with the intention of
reducing tendencies to behave in certain ways.
Reinforcement builds up these tendencies; punishment is
designed to tear them down.
The technique has often been analyzed, and many familiar
questions continue to be asked. Must punishment be closely
contingent upon the behavior punished? Must the individual
know what he is being punished for? What forms of
punishment are most effective and under what
circumstances? This concern may be due to the reali182

PUNISHMENT

183

zation that the technique has unfortunate by-products. In the
long run, punishment, unlike reinforcement, works to the
disadvantage of both the punished organism and the
punishing agency. The aver-sive stimuli which are needed
generate emotions, including predispositions to escape or
retaliate, and disabling anxieties. For thousands of years
men have asked whether the method could not be improved
or whether some alternative practice would not be better.
DOES PUNISHMENT WORK
More recently, the suspicion has also arisen that
punishment does not in fact do what it is supposed to do. An
immediate effect in reducing a tendency to behave is clear
enough, but this may be misleading. The reduction in
strength may not be permanent. An explicit revision in the
theory of punishment may be dated by the changes in the
theories of E. L. Thorndike. Thorndike's first formulation of
the behavior of his cats in a puzzle box appealed to two
processes: the stamping in of rewarded behavior, or operant
conditioning, and a converse process of stamping out as the
effect of punishment. Thorndike's later experiments with
human subjects required a change in this formulation. The
rewards and punishments he used were the relatively mild,
verbal conditioned reinfoicers of "right" and "wrong."
Thorndike found that although "right" strengthened the
behavior that preceded it, "wrong" did not weaken it. The
relatively trivial nature of the punishment was probably an
advantage, since the collateral effects of severe punishment
could be avoided and the absence of a weakening effect
could therefore be observed without interference from other
processes.
The difference between immediate and long-term effects
of punishment is clearly shown in animal experiments. In
the process of extinction the organism emits a certain
number of responses which can be reasonably well
predicted. As we have seen, the rate is at first high and then
falls off until no significant responding occurs. The
cumulative extinction curve is one way of representing the
net effect of reinforcement, an effect which we may describe
as a predisposition to emit a certain number of responses
without further reinforcement. If we now punish the first
few responses emitted in extinction,

184

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

the theory of punishment would lead us to expect that the
rest of the extinction curve would contain fewer responses.
If we could choose a punishment which subtracted the same
number of responses as are added by a reinforcement, then
fifty reinforced responses followed by twenty-five punished
responses should leave an extinction curve characteristic of
twenty-five reinforced responses. When a similar experiment
was performed, however, it was found that although
punishing responses at the beginning of an extinction curve
reduced the momentary rate of responding, the rate rose
again when punishment was discontinued and that
eventually all responses came out. The effect of punishment
was a temporary suppression of the behavior, not a reduction
in the total number of responses. Even under severe and
prolonged punishment, the rate of responding will rise when
punishment has been discontinued, and although under these
circumstances it is not easy to show that all the responses
originally available will eventually appear, it has been found
that after a given time the rate of responding is no lower
than if no punishment had taken place.
The fact that punishment does not permanently reduce a
tendency to respond is in agreement with Freud's discovery
of the surviving activity of what he called repressed wishes.
As we shall see later, Freud's observations can be brought
into line with the present analysis.
THE EFFECTS OF PUNISHMENT
If punishment is not the opposite of reward, if it does not
work by subtracting responses where reinforcement adds
them, what does it do? We can answer this question with the
help of our analysis of escape and of avoidance and anxiety.
The answer supplies not only a clear-cut picture of the effect
of punishment but an explanation of its unfortunate byproducts. The analysis is somewhat detailed, but it is
essential to the proper use of the technique and to the
therapy required to correct some of its consequences.
We must first define punishment without presupposing
any effect. This may appear to be difficult. In defining a
reinforcing stimulus we could avoid specifying physical
characteristics by appealing to the

PUNISHMENT

185

effect upon the strength of the behavior. If a punishing
consequence is also defined without reference to its
physical characteristics and if there is no comparable effect
to use as a touchstone, what course is open to us? The
answer is as follows. We first define a positive reinforcer as
any stimulus the presentation of which strengthens the
behavior upon which it is made contingent. We define a
negative reinforcer (an aversive stimulus) as any stimulus
the withdrawal of which strengthens behavior. Both are
reinforcers in the literal sense of reinforcing or
strengthening a response. Insofar as scientific definition
corresponds to lay usage, they are both "rewards." In
solving the problem of punishment we simply ask: What is
the effect of withdrawing a positive reinforcer or presenting
a negative? An example of the former would be taking
candy from a baby; an example of the latter, spanking a
baby. We have not used any new terms in posing these
questions and hence need not define any. Yet insofar as we
are able to give a scientific definition of a lay term, these
two possibilities appear to constitute the field of
punishment. We do not presuppose any effect; we simply
raise a question to be answered by appropriate experiments.
The physical specifications of both kinds of consequences
are determined in the case in which behavior is
strengthened. Conditioned reinforcers, including the
generalized reinforcers, fit the same definition: we punish
by disapproving, by taking money away, as in a legal fine,
and so on.
Although punishment is a powerful technique of social
control, it is not necessarily administered by another
individual. The burned child has been punished for touching
flame. Eating unsuitable food is punished by indigestion. It
is not necessary that the contingency represent an
established functional relation, such as that between flames
and burns or certain foods and indigestion. When a
salesman in a midwestern city once approached a house and
rang the doorbell, the rear of the house exploded. There was
only an accidental and very rare contingency: gas had
escaped into the kitchen, and the explosion was set off by
sparks from the electric doorbell. The effect upon the
subsequent behavior of the salesman as he rang other
doorbells nevertheless falls within the present field.

186

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

A FIRST EFFECT OF PUNISHMENT
The first effect of the aversive stimuli used in punishment
is confined to the immediate situation. It need not be
followed by any change in behavior upon later occasions.
When we stop a child from giggling in church by pinching it
severely, the pinch elicits responses which are incompatible
with laughing and powerful enough to suppress it. Although
our action may have other consequences, we can single out
the competing effect of the responses elicited by the
punishing stimulus. The same effect is obtained with a
conditioned stimulus when we stop the child with a
threatening gesture. This requires earlier conditioning, but
the current effect is simply the elicitation of incompatible
behavior—the responses appropriate, for example, to fear.
The formula can be extended to include emotional
predispositions. Thus we may stop a man from running
away by making him angry. The aversive stimulus which
makes him angry may be unconditioned (for example,
stamping on his toe) or conditioned (for example, calling
him a coward). We may stop someone from eating his
dinner by frightening him with a sudden deafening noise or
a gruesome story.
It is not essential to this effect that the aversive stimulus
be contingent upon behavior in the standard punishing
sequence. When that sequence is observed, however, the
effect still occurs and must be considered as one of the
results of punishment. It resembles other effects of
punishment in bringing undesirable behavior to an end; but
since this is temporary, it is not likely to be accepted as
typical of control through punishment.
A SECOND EFFECT OF PUNISHMENT
Punishment is generally supposed to have some abiding
effect. It is hoped that some change in behavior will be
observed in the future, even though further punishment is
withheld. One enduring effect, also not often considered as
typical, resembles the effect just considered. When a child
who has been pinched for giggling starts to giggle upon a
later occasion, his own behavior may supply conditioned
stimuli which, like the mother's threatening gesture, evoke

PUNISHMENT

187

opposed emotional responses. We have seen an adult parallel
in the use of drugs which induce nausea or other aversive
conditions as consequences of drinking alcoholic beverages. As
a result later drinking generates conditioned aversive stimuli
which evoke responses incompatible with further drinking.
As an effect of the severe punishment of sexual behavior, the
early stages of such behavior generate conditioned stimuli
giving rise to emotional responses which interfere with the
completion of the behavior. One difficulty with the technique
is that punishment for sexual behavior may interfere with
similar behavior under socially acceptable circumstances—for
example, in marriage. In general, then, as a second effect of
punishment, behavior which has consistently been punished
becomes the source of conditioned stimuli which evoke
incompatible behavior.
Some of this behavior involves glands and smooth muscles.
Let us say, for example, that a child is consistently punished
for lying. The behavior is not easily specified, since a verbal
response is not necessarily in itself a lie but can be defined as
such only by taking into account the circumstances under
which it is emitted. These circumstances come to play a
conspicuous role, however, so that the total situation stimulates
the child in a characteristic fashion. For reasons which we shall
examine in Chapter XVII, an individual is in general able to tell
when he is lying. The stimuli to which he responds when he
does so are conditioned to elicit responses appropriate to
punishment: his palms may sweat, his pulse may speed up,
and so on. When he later lies during a lie-detection test, these
conditioned responses are recorded.
Strong emotional predispositions are also rearoused by the
beginnings of severely punished behavior. These are the main
ingredient of what we speak of as guilt, shame, or a sense of
sin. Part of what we feel when we feel guilty are conditioned
responses of glands and smooth muscles of the kind reported
by the lie detector, but we may also recognize a displacement
of the normal probabilities of our behavior. This is often the
most conspicuous feature of the guilt of others. The furtive
look, the skulking manner, the guilty way of speaking are
emotional effects of the conditioned stimuli aroused by
punished behavior. Comparable effects are observed in lower
animals:

188

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

the guilty behavior of a dog which is behaving in a way
which has previously been punished is a familiar spectacle.
A case may be easily set up in the laboratory. If a rat has
been conditioned to press a lever by being reinforced with
food and is then punished by being lightly shocked as it
presses the lever, its behavior in approaching and touching
the lever will be modified. The early stages in the sequence
generate conditioned emotional stimuli which alter the
behavior previously established. Since the punishment is not
directly administered by another organism, the pattern does
not resemble the more familiar behavior of guilt in the pet
dog.
A condition of guilt or shame is generated not only by
previously punished behavior but by any consistent external
occasion for such behavior. The individual may feel guilty
in a situation in which he has been punished. We gain
control by introducing stimuli for just this effect. For
example, if we punish a child for any behavior executed
after we have said "No, no!" this verbal stimulus will later
evoke an emotional state appropriate to punishment. When
this policy has been followed consistently, the behavior of
the child may be controlled simply by saying "No, no!"
since the stimulus arouses an emotional condition which
conflicts with the response to be controlled.
Although the rearousal of responses appropriate to
aversive stimuli is again not the main effect of punishment,
it works in the same direction. In none of these cases,
however, have we supposed that the punished response is
permanently weakened. It is merely temporarily suppressed,
more or less effectively, by an emotional reaction.
A THIRD EFFECT OF PUNISHMENT
We come now to a much more important effect. If a given
response is followed by an aversive stimulus, any
stimulation which accompanies the response, whether it
arises from the behavior itself or from concurrent
circumstances, will be conditioned. We have just appealed to
this formula in accounting for conditioned emotional
reflexes and predispositions, but the same process also leads
to the conditioning of aversive stimuli which serve as
negative reinforcers. Any behavior which reduces this
conditioned aversive stimulation will be reinforced.

PUNISHMENT

189

In the example just considered, as the rat approaches the
lever to which its recent responses have been punished,
powerful conditioned aversive stimuli are generated by the
increasing proximity of the lever and by the rat's own
behavior of approach. Any behavior which reduces these
stimuli—turning or running away, for example—is
reinforced. Technically we may say that further punishment
is avoided.
The most important effect of punishment, then, is to
establish aversive conditions which are avoided by any
behavior of "doing something else." It is important—for
both practical and theoretical reasons—to specify this
behavior. It is not enough to say that what is strengthened is
simply the opposite. Sometimes it is merely "doing
nothing" in the form of actively holding still. Sometimes it is
behavior appropriate to other current variables which are
not, however, sufficient to explain the level of probability of
the behavior without supposing that the individual is also
acting "for the sake of keeping out of trouble."
The effect of punishment in setting up behavior which
competes with, and may displace, the punished response is
most commonly described by saying that the individual
represses the behavior, but we need not appeal to any
activity which does not have the dimensions of behavior. If
there is any repressing force or agent, it is simply the
incompatible response. The individual contributes to the
process by executing this response. (In Chapter XVIII we
shall find that another sort of repression involves the
individual's knowledge of the repressed act.) No change in
the strength of the punished response is implied.
If punishment is repeatedly avoided, the conditioned
negative reinforcer undergoes extinction. Incompatible
behavior is then less and less strongly reinforced, and the
punished behavior eventually emerges. When punishment
again occurs, the aversive stimuli are reconditioned, and the
behavior of doing something else is then reinforced. If
punishment is discontinued, the behavior may emerge in
full strength.
When an individual is punished for not responding in a
given way, conditioned aversive stimulation is generated
when he is doing any-

190

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

thing else. Only by behaving in a given way may he
become free of "guilt." Thus one may avoid the aversive
stimulation generated by "not doing one's duty" by simply
doing one's duty. No moral or ethical problem is
necessarily involved: a draft horse is kept moving
according to the same formula. When the horse slows
down, the slower pace (or the crack of a whip) supplies a
conditioned aversive stimulus from which the horse
escapes by increasing its speed. The aversive effect must be
reinstated from time to time by actual contact with the
whip.
Since punishment depends in large part upon the behavior
of other people, it is likely to be intermittent. The action
which is always punished is rare. All the schedules of
reinforcement described in Chapter VI are presumably
available.
SOME UNFORTUNATE BYPRODUCTS OF PUNISHMENT
Severe punishment unquestionably has an immediate
effect in reducing a tendency to act in a given way. This
result is no doubt responsible for its widespread use. We
"instinctively" attack anyone whose behavior displeases us
—perhaps not in physical assault, but with criticism,
disapproval, blame, or ridicule. Whether or not there is an
inherited tendency to do this, the immediate effect of the
practice is reinforcing enough to explain its currency. In the
long run, however, punishment does not actually eliminate
behavior from a repertoire, and its temporary achievement
is obtained at tremendous cost in reducing the over-all
efficiency and happiness of the group.
One by-product is a sort of conflict between the response
which leads to punishment and the response which avoids
it. These responses are incompatible and they are both
likely to be strong at the same time. The repressing
behavior generated by even severe and sustained
punishment often has very little advantage over the
behavior it represses. The result of such a conflict is
discussed in Chaptei XIV. When punishment is only
intermittently administered, the conflict is especially
troublesome, as we see in the case of the child who "does
not know when he will be punished and when he will get
away with it." Responses which avoid punishment may
alternate with

PUNISHMENT

191

punished responses in rapid oscillation or both may blend into an
uncoordinated form. In the awkward, timorous, or "inhibited"
person, standard behavior is interrupted by distracting responses,
such as turning, stopping, and doing something else. The stutterer or
stammerer shows a similar effect on a finer scale.
Another by-product of the use of punishment is even more
unfortunate. Punished behavior is often strong, and certain incipient
stages are therefore frequently reached. Even though the stimulation
thus generated is successful in preventing a full-scale occurrence, it
also evokes reflexes characteristic of fear, anxiety, and other
emotions. Moreover, the incompatible behavior which blocks the
punished response may resemble external physical restraint in
generating rage or frustration. Since the variables responsible for
these emotional patterns are generated by the organism itself, no
appropriate escape behavior is available. The condition may be
chronic and may result in "psychosomatic" illness or otherwise
interfere with the effective behavior of the individual in his daily life
(Chapter XXIV).
Perhaps the most troublesome result is obtained when the behavior
punished is reflex—for example, weeping. Here it is usually not
possible to execute "just the opposite," since such behavior is not
conditioned according to the operant formula. The repressing
behavior must therefore work through a second stage, as in the
operant control of "involuntary behavior" discussed in Chapter VI.
Some examples will be considered in Chapter XXIV where the
techniques of psychotherapy will be shown to be mainly concerned
with the unfortunate by-products of punishment.
ALTERNATIVES TO PUNISHMENT

We may avoid the use of punishment by weakening an operant in
other ways. Behavior which is conspicuously due to emotional
circumstances, for example, is often likely to be punished, but it may
often be more effectively controlled by modifying the circumstances.
Changes brought about by satiation, too, often have the effect which
is contemplated in the use of punishment. Behavior may often be
eliminated from a repertoire, especially in young children, simply by
allowing time to pass in accordance with a developmental schedule.

192

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

If the behavior is largely a function of age, the child will, as
we say, outgrow it. It is not always easy to put up with the
behavior until this happens, especially under the conditions
of the average household, but there is some consolation if
we know that by carrying the child through a socially
unacceptable stage we spare him the later complications
arising from punishment.
Another way of weakening a conditioned response is
simply to let time pass. This process of forgetting is not to
be confused with extinction. Unfortunately it is generally
slow and also requires that occasions for the behavior be
avoided.
The most effective alternative process is probably
extinction. This takes time but is much more rapid than
allowing the response to be forgotten. The technique seems
to be relatively free of objectionable by-products. We
recommend it, for example, when we suggest that a parent
"pay no attention" to objectionable behavior on the part of
his child. If the child's behavior is strong only because it has
been reinforced by "getting a rise out of" the parent, it will
disappear when this consequence is no longer forthcoming.
Another technique is to condition incompatible behavior,
not by withdrawing censure or guilt, but through positive
reinforcement. We use this method when we control a
tendency toward emotional display by reinforcing stoical
behavior. This is very different from punishing emotional
behavior, even though the latter also provides for the
indirect reinforcement of stoical behavior through a
reduction in aversive stimuli. Direct positive reinforcement
is to be preferred because it appears to have fewer
objectionable by-products.
Civilized man has made some progress in turning from
punishment to alternative forms of control. Avenging gods
and hell-fire have given way to an emphasis upon heaven and
the positive consequences of the good life. In agriculture and
industry, fair wages are recognized as an improvement over
slavery. The birch rod has made way for the reinforcements
naturally accorded the educated man. Even in politics and
government the power to punish has been supplemented by
a more positive support of the behavior which conforms to
the interests of the governing agency. But we are still a long
way from exploiting the alternatives, and we are not likely to
make any real advance

PUNISHMENT

193

so long as our information about punishment and the
alternatives to punishment remains at the level of casual
observation. As a consistent picture of the extremely
complex consequences of punishment emerges from
analytical research, we may gain the confidence and skill
needed to design alternative procedures in the clinic, in
education, in industry, in politics, and in other practical
fields.

CHAPTER XIII

FUNCTION VERSUS ASPECT

Frequently we describe behavior not with verbs
which specify action but with adjectives describing
characteristics or aspects of action. Instead of saying, "He
shook hands and said, 'Hello, hello/ " we may say, "He was
most cordial." The adjective "cordial" is one of a list of about
4,500 English words compiled by Allport and Odbert which
refer to more or less enduring traits of human behavior. If
we add terms which refer to temporary conditions, such as
"embarrassed" or "hazy," the number is about doubled. Most
of these trait-names are nontechnical words which we use in
our daily affairs. They are an essential tool of the novelist;
literature is, in fact, responsible for adding many of them to
the language. By describing human behavior in
characteristic situations, the storyteller creates convenient
expressions for later use—such as "dog in the manger" or "a
Daniel come to judgment." The list has also been extended
by the invention of such technical terms as "phlegmatic" and
"melancholic" or, more recently, "inhibited," "introverted,"
and "cerebrotonic."
Staying at a single letter in the Allport and Odbert list, a
biographer might describe the behavior of a subject as
follows: "There was a remarkable change in his behavior.
Where he had been happy-go-lucky, he grew hesitant and
heavy-handed. His natural humility gave
194

FUNCTION VERSUS ASPECT

195

way to a sustained haughtiness. Once the most helpful of
men, he became heedless and hard-hearted. A sort of
histrionic horseplay was all that remained of his fine sense
of humor." A passage of this sort tells us something
important. If it were a description of an old friend, for
example, it would prepare us to deal with him more
effectively when we saw him again. But it may come as
something of a surprise to discover that no behavior has
actually been described. Not a single action has been
mentioned. The passage might be describing a series of
letters—of a colleague or business acquaintance, perhaps.
On the other hand, it might be describing a wholly
nonverbal scene from a ballet. It might concern a
shopkeeper, a plant foreman, a salesman, a diplomat, a
schoolboy—in short, any one of dozens of different kinds of
people whose behavior would have nothing in common
except those aspects to which the passage refers.
There are practical circumstances under which it is useful
to know that a man will behave in a given manner even
though we may not know precisely what he will do. To be
able to predict, for example, that a proposal will probably be
"received favorably" is valuable even though the specific
form of the reception remains to be seen. Under certain
circumstances everything else about the behavior may be
irrelevant, and a description in terms of traits is then highly
economical. But are terms of this sort valuable in a
functional analysis? And if they are, how are they related to
the variables which we have so far considered?
WHAT ARE TRAITS?
A common and unchanging property of the behavior of all
members of a species would not usefully be referred to as a
trait at all. It is only because people differ from moment to
moment or from person to person that trait-names arise. We
may look for the equivalents of traits in a functional
analysis, therefore, by asking in how many ways we should
expect a person to differ from other persons or from himself
from time to time.
Differences in variables. Some differences are due to the
differences in the independent variables to which people are
exposed. Although

196

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

we may be struck by the effect upon behavior, the original
individuality lies outside the organism. Differences in
experience between the "ignorant" and the "learned," the
"naive" and the "sophisticated," or the "innocent" and the
"worldly" refer mainly to differences in histories of
reinforcement. Such terms as "enthusiastic," "interested,"'
and "discouraged" describe the effects of different schedules
of reinforcement. People are "inhibited," "timid," or
"cowed" because of special contingencies involving
punishment. The "discriminating" individual has made
distinctions among stimuli which are not made by the
"undiscriminating." Differences in deprivation lead us to
distinguish between the "voracious" and the "finicky," the
"libidinous" and the "sexless." Differences in hereditary
endowment, which are too conspicuous to be overlooked
when we compare different species but presumably are also
present to a lesser extent between members of a single
species, account for other differences in repertoire, as do
differences in age ("youthful," "senile") or in development
("infantile," "adolescent"). The field of emotion has scarcely
advanced beyond an aspect-description, where more or less
transitory differences in behavior are attributed to various
exciting circumstances ("frightened," "angry," and
"embarrassed").
Traits of this sort are simply a way of representing the
repertoire of an organism, with some indication of the
relative strength of its parts and with certain inferences
regarding relevant variables. The "tests" which measure such
traits are inventories, which list responses falling within
certain classes and estimate their relative frequencies of
occurrence. Surveys of attitudes and opinions are usually of
this sort, as are tests of achievement. The Kinsey reports on
sexual behavior are surveys of frequencies of certain types of
responses from which we may infer certain conditions of
deprivation, a history of sexual reinforcement, and the
health and hereditary endowment of the organism.
Differences in processes. A second kind of difference in
behavior arises from a difference in the rate at which changes
in behavior take place. The "intelligent" individual, for
example, is commonly supposed to show more rapid
conditioning and extinction, to form discriminations more
rapidly, and so on. The resulting effect upon

FUNCTION VERSUS ASPECT

197

behavior is not always distinguishable from that of
"experience." When an individual scores high on an
achievement test, the result may be traced either to an
exposure to certain variables or to the rate at which these
variables have taken effect or to both. Vocabulary tests, for
example, presumably reflect differences both in exposure
and in rate of conditioning. When we distinguish between
the "phlegmatic" and the "sanguine" or "the slow-to-anger"
and the "truculent," the differences are not in degree of
deprivation or emotional circumstances but in the speed
with which behavior changes as a function of such
circumstances.
Traits of this second sort cannot be measured by an
inventory. If we want to know simply whether a given set of
conditions will make a man angry or lead him ito take any
other sort of action, a survey of his behavior under those
conditions will suffice. If, however, we want to know how
quickly he becomes angry or how alertly he takes action, we
need a measure appropriate to a functional process.Differences of this second sort can eventually be expressed
in quantitative form as differences in the values of certain
constants in the equations describing the appropriate
processes. Once these values are available, they will
characterize an individual just as the physical constants of
thermal conductivity, electrical conductivity, specific
gravity, and so on characterize materials. (It is significant
that these "individual differences" among physical objects
were once attributed to essences or principles which strongly
resemble traits as the term is now commonly used.)
Traits which can be reduced to inventories of behavior, to
the relative strengths of parts of a repertoire, or to the speed
with which behavioral processes take place have acceptable
scientific dimensions, and their relation to a functional
analysis is clear. Those who are currently engaged in the
study of traits, however, almost always quantify their data in
a quite different way. The intelligence test is a classic
example. When a man takes such a test, he makes a score.
This is numerical, but it is not an acceptable measure of a
trait because it is arbitrary: it depends upon the length of the
test, its nature, the time allowed in taking it, and so on. To
obtain a less arbitrary measure, the same test is given to a
number of people under

198

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

comparable conditions, and each raw score is converted into a
standard score which gives the position of the individual with
respect to the group. Even this standard score is not a
quantitative measure of a trait; it simply shows that the
performance of an individual exceeds that of a certain
percentage of the group. But the group is, like the original
score, arbitrary. Trouble will arise when we try to use such a
measure in a different group.
The difference between a measure based upon a population
and a measure based upon frequency of response is clear when
we consider a population of only one man. Robinson Crusoe,
before the advent of his man Friday, must have shown a certain
repertoire of behavior, certain frequencies of response, and
certain rates of change in frequency. Occasionally he must
have been hungry in the sense of being inclined to eat at a given
rate, angry in the sense of being disposed to injure animals or
objects, and intelligent in the sense of being quick to solve the
problems of his daily life. His behavior must have been
modified at given rates as the result of certain contingencies. He
must have been able to discriminate stimuli of given
complexities or subtleties. All this he himself might have
observed and measured in a quantitative way. He could not,
however, have measured his own I.Q., since he could not
have devised a test on which his score would be divested of
the arbitrary features of length, level of difficulty, or allotted
time.
The use of a population to measure a trait is illustrated by a
scale commonly used to designate the hardness of minerals.
The scale ranges from 1 (talc) to 10 (diamond). When we say
that quartz has a hardness of 7, we mean that it will scratch or
cut all minerals having a hardness of 6 or less, and that it in
turn can be cut by minerals of hardness 8, 9, or 10. If the world
were constructed of quartz alone, the number 7 would have no
significance. Such a scale is unquestionably useful for
technological purposes, but it does not greatly advance the study
of the hardness of minerals. The physicist accounts for different
positions on the scale as differences in molecular structure. A
measure of the hardness of quartz expressed in terms of
structure is meaningful without reference to minerals of other
hardnesses. Insofar as we can express differences in
intelligence as differences in reper-

FUNCTION VERSUS ASPECT

199

toire, in exposure to variables, or in rates of change, our
measure is similarly independent of a population.
PREDICTION IN TERMS OF TRAITS
A test is simply a convenient opportunity to observe
behavior—to survey or sample our dependent variable. The
score may be used to predict some aspect of the larger
universe of behavior from which the test is drawn. Thus a
test of mechanical ability, or intelligence, or extroversion
may enable us to predict success or failure in a job in which
these traits are important. But the causal relation invoked in
this kind of prediction is not the same as that which appears
in a functional analysis. Certain variables in the history of
the individual and in the current environment are
responsible for the behavior in the test situation, and they
also determine the behavior in the larger situation. The
prediction is not from cause to effect, but from one effect to
another. This is shown by the fact that we use tests as a basis
for prediction without knowing what variables are
responsible for the score obtained or for the behavior
predicted. It is shown also by the fact that if we extend a test
without limit, adding more and more items, it eventually
coincides with the behavior to be predicted. No true
prediction then survives. There is no way in which we could
extend a true independent variable so that it would become
identical with the dependent variable in a functional
analysis.
A prediction from effect to effect is, of course, sometimes
useful. It may enable us to dispense with the direct
observation of variables. This is particularly important when
the variables are clearly out of reach. For example, whether
an individual shows certain patterns of behavior
characteristic of his species or where he stands with respect
to other members of his species in relative frequency of
response, as in the Kinsey reports, can at the moment be
determined only through a survey, since we have no direct
control over the independent variables. A complete survey
of such behavior would be easily understood; an incomplete
survey constitutes a "test" from which the result of a
complete survey may be inferred.
We may also find it convenient to survey the current
effects of variables which, though manipulable, lie in the
remote history of the

200

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

individual. We use body weight as a current indication of a
history of food deprivation in predicting the probability that an
experimental animal will eat, and we might use some collateral
test of the "trait of voracity" for the same purpose. Rate of
eating in a test situation would enable us to predict rate of
eating in a larger experimental situation. Similarly, by
making an inventory of current aggressive tendencies, we
may dispense with the possibly difficult study of early
environmental factors responsible for aggressive behavior.
The principal advantages of a functional analysis are lost,
however, when we resort to these alternative practices. Perhaps
the most conspicuous feature of an aspect-description is its
failure to advance the control of behavior. By measuring a set
of traits, we judge the suitability of an individual to a given
task, but the only practical step is to accept or reject him. The
measurement of the trait does not suggest a way of altering his
suitability to the task, for it does not bring us into contact with
variables which may be manipulated in generating or
eliminating the behavior which it describes. The only practical
advantage we gain is that we may make better use of relevant
variables already in our possession.
Instead of predicting performance from the test of a trait,
we may be interested in predicting one trait from another or
from some other sort of variable. Thus a personality in all its
manifestations is often attributed to the physique of the
organism, a relation which is presumably capable of being
expressed trait by trait. Often personality is attributed to
variables which are immediately controllable. For example,
the "oral," "anal," and "erotic" personalities of Freud refer to
groups of traits which are assumed to have been generated by
the early history of the individual—a history which is
presumably modifiable, if taken in time, or at least capable of
being masked by a later history superimposed upon it. A
similar controlling relation is suggested for a single trait
when it is asserted that aggressiveness is a function of
frustration. There are, however, certain inherent limitations in
a functional analysis in which the dependent variable is a
trait.
The usefulness of any lawful relation depends upon the
sharpness of reference of the terms in which it is stated. We
may predict and

FUNCTION VERSUS ASPECT

201

control only as much as we specify in our laws. We have
seen that there are practical circumstances under which it
may be useful to predict traits, but in general the trait-name
tells us little about behavior. It is not only lack of specificity,
however, which makes the trait-name unsuitable for a
functional analysis. In the chapters which follow we shall
turn to certain complex processes. Interlocking systems of
responses will be traced to complex arrangements of
variables, and a workable conception of the individual as a
responding system will be set up. The trait-name does not
refer to a unit of behavior which makes such an analysis
possible.
The fact that a conception of the individual as a behaving
system seems to lie beyond the reach of an aspectdescription is exemplified by a practical problem in current
clinical psychology. Through an extensive use of tests and
other measurements of aspects of behavior the individual is
characterized for diagnostic purposes. But the resulting
information is of little or no help in therapy—in dealing
with the individual as a dynamic system. The clinician must
turn from a "psychograph" of the personality to "common
sense" or to an entirely different conceptual system—such as
that of psychoanalysis, which, as we shall see later, is similar
to a functional analysis. Currently, little or no effort is being
made to reconcile these two ways of dealing with human
behavior, perhaps because a reconciliation seems hopeless.
The measurement of aspects of behavior is likely to be
associated with the belief that the business of science is
primarily to supply information which is then used to
further the art of dealing with people, not only in the clinic,
but in salesmanship, education, family counseling, labor
problems, diplomacy, and so on. But the special wisdom
which this art presupposes, the special insight into human
behavior which is needed to make effective use of such
information, is precisely what a functional analysis supplies.
We are all thoroughly familiar with descriptions of
behavior in terms of traits, and trait-names are an extensive
part of our daily vocabulary. As a result, we feel at home in
describing behavior in this way. But the familiarity is
misleading. The fact is that we can predict and control a
response much more readily than a trait. A response is
easier to define and identify, and its probability varies more

202

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

sensitively. Even when we define a trait as a group of
responses, the unity or coherence of the group needs to be
proved. Do all the responses which are taken to be
evidences of aggressiveness, for example, vary together
with a given condition of frustration? And are all conditions
of frustration equally effective? In order to be sure of the
unity of the trait, we have to show that each of the acts
which "expresses" it is controlled by each of the conditions
specified as its cause—that each aggressive act, for example,
is controlled to the same degree by every condition which can
be described as frustrating. But this is the program of a
functional analysis. We have not reduced the labor of such an
analysis by resorting to summary statements in terms of traits.
Almost any characteristic may be set up as a dimension of
the personality, but this extended coverage is of little value
until something is achieved beyond mere naming. The
additional work required to establish traits as scientific
categories is just as laborious and just as detailed as the
analysis of discrete responses. The effort required to make
any account comprehensive is determined by the subject
matter itself. Unfortunately, behavior is complex.
TRAITS ARE NOT CAUSES
Trait-names usually begin as adjectives—"intelligent,"
"aggressive," "disorganized," "angry," "introverted,"
"ravenous," and so on—but the almost inevitable linguistic
result is that adjectives give birth to nouns. The things to
which these nouns refer are then taken to be the active
causes of the aspects. We begin with "intelligent behavior,"
pass first to "behavior which shows intelligence," and then to
"behavior which is the effect of intelligence." Similarly, we
begin by observing a preoccupation with a mirror which
recalls the legend of Narcissus; we invent the adjective
"narcissistic," and then the noun "narcissism"; and finally we
assert that the thing presumably referred to by the noun is the
cause of the behavior with which we began. But at no point
in such a series do we make contact with any event outside
the behavior itself which justifies the claim of a causal
connection.
Efforts have been made to put the matter in better
scientific order

FUNCTION VERSUS ASPECT

203

by establishing the validity of the trait as a conceptual cause.
A search for the smallest number of traits which will
"explain" behavior has worked in this direction. Since traitnames come from many sources and may be multiplied at
will, the kinds of behavior to which they refer often overlap.
The overlap may be discovered by analyzing the forms of
behavior specified in tests of two traits or by showing that
the result on one test enables us to predict the result on
another. When two traits are found to be almost identical,
one is simply dropped. When the overlap is not complete,
we appear to be measuring a trait which is common to both
tests, yet not measured exclusively by either one. The trait
therefore appears to have different dimensions from the
behavior from which it is inferred, and this fact has
encouraged those who are concerned with finding a minimal
set of these causes.
The smallest number of traits needed to account for the
performances of a group of people on a number of tests may
be determined through certain mathematical procedures.
From such a result we may say that a given individual does
well in one group of tests because he possesses a certain
amount of a certain trait, and on another group of tests
because he possesses a certain amount of a different trait.
Since these procedures take us some distance away from the
observed data, it is tempting to identify the resulting traits or
factors with physiological states or psychological faculties
and to give them additional dimensions not found in the
measures of behavior from which they were inferred.
Regardless of the length of the mathematical procedure,
however, a trait or factor is derived from the observation of
the dependent variable only. This limitation is not changed by
any mathematical operation. A fairly exhaustive set of tests
may enable us to evaluate traits and to predict performances
in a wide range of situations, but the prediction is still from
effect to effect. The mathematical refinement has not
brought the trait under control. We do not change behavior
by manipulating a trait.

CHAPTER XIV

THE ANALYSIS OF
COMPLEX CASES

"OVERSIMPLIFICATION"

In a scientific analysis it is seldom possible to
proceed directly to complex cases. We begin with the simple
and build up to the complex, step by step. In its early years
any science is vulnerable to the charge that it neglects
important instances. Boyle's Law, relating the volume of a
gas to its pressure, was a significant advance in knowledge,
but a contemporary critic could easily have denounced it as a
flagrant oversimplification. It was only necessary to vary the
temperature to show that volume was not simply a function
of pressure. When the temperature was specified in a new
version of the law, more precise measurements could still
show that there were discrepancies between different gases,
and a "gas constant" had to be added to the equation. There
is nothing wrong with this sort of patchwork,1 it is the way
scientific knowledge grows.
In a science of behavior we begin in the simplest way. We
study relatively simple organisms with relatively simple
histories and under relatively simple environmental
conditions. In this way we obtain the degree of rigor
necessary for a scientific analysis. Our data are as
204

THE ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX CASES

205

uniform and reproducible as, say, the data of modern
biology. It is true that the simplicity is to some extent
artificial. We do not often find anything like it outside the
laboratory—especially in the field of human behavior,
which is of primary interest. As a result those who are
impatient to get on to bigger issues are inclined to object to
the "oversimplified" formulations of the laboratory. Their
objections take the form, as in the example of Boyle's Law,
of setting forth apparent exceptions to the rule. Such
criticism is useful if it points to facts which have been
unseen or ignored. But very often the exceptions are only
apparent; the existing formulation is capable of giving a
good account of them when properly applied.
A common source of misunderstanding is the neglect of
what happens when variables are combined in different ways.
Although a functional analysis begins with relatively
isolated relations, an important part of its task is to show
how its variables interact. Several important cases will be
discussed in the present chapter.
MULTIPLE
EFFECTS OF A
SINGLE
VARIABLE
A given event may have two or more kinds of effects upon
behavior at the same time. In the analysis of punishment in
Chapter XII it was seen that a single aversive stimulus
contingent upon a response has at least four effects. (1) It
elicits reflexes, often of an emotional nature. (2) It alters
emotional predispositions to act in various ways. (3) It
serves as a reinforcing stimulus in respondent conditioning
when paired with stimuli which precede or accompany it;
these stimuli eventually evoke the responses and
predispositions of (1) and (2), and any avoidance behavior
which brings the stimuli to an end is reinforced. (4) It
makes possible the reinforcement of any escape behavior
which brings the punishing stimulus itself to an end. In this
example, then, a single event serves as an eliciting stimulus,
an emotional operation, a reinforcing stimulus in
respondent conditioning, and a negative reinforcer in
operant conditioning.
It would be meaningless to say that an event has two or
more effects if we could not separate them. When the
effects are felt at different times, this is not difficult. For
example, a reinforcement

206

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

may be of such magnitude that considerable satiation takes
place, The strengthening effect of the reinforcement may be
temporarily concealed by the weakening effect of satiation.
Thus a single, relatively large payment of wages may
produce such a degree of satiation that the worker does not
work again for some time, but the reinforcing effect of the
wage will become evident when a sufficient deprivation
again arises.
A common objection to the Law of Effect provides
another example. The doctrine of "need-gratification" in
psychotherapy is based upon the fact that behavior which has
been strengthened by deprivation is weakened by satiation.
Satiation thus becomes a clinical procedure. For example,
behavior which is strong because it has been reinforced with
personal attention may be weakened if the individual
receives attention or if the primary deprivations responsible
for the reinforcing power of attention are reduced. Similarly,
behavior which is strong because it gets affection can be
weakened by giving affection or appropriate primary
reinforcers. It has been argued that these results contradict
the Law of Effect, which appears to predict that the behavior
should be strengthened rather than weakened. But the case is
easily formulated in terms of the multiple effects of giving
attention or affection. A child who is behaving in an asocial
fashion to draw attention to himself may be "cured" by a
sizable measure of attention if satiation takes precedence
over reinforcement, as it may. But what will happen when
deprivation again arises? If the "cure" sends the patient back
for more attention or affection, a reinforcing effect is
obvious. (This can be avoided. If a certain "needgratification" is prescribed, it should be given when the
patient is not misbehaving. This will produce satiation
without reinforcing undesirable behavior.)
An objection which has been raised to the principle of
satiation supplies an example of a different set of multiple
effects. Suppose we approach a child who is playing happily
by himself and give him a small piece of candy. We may
observe the sudden emergence of a great deal of
objectionable behavior—asking and teasing for more candy,
then crying, and perhaps even a temper tantrum. We appeal
to have increased his candy-hunger, although our definition
of satia-

THE ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX CASES

207

tion implies that we have decreased it, at least by a small
amount. The explanation is that the candy has had a second
effect. The sight and taste of candy are discriminative stimuli
under which the behavior of asking or reaching for candy is
frequently effective. There is no likelier occasion for the
reinforcement of such behavior than the immediate presence
of candy. By giving the child a small amount of candy, we
establish a common situation in which powerful behavior
under the control of candy-deprivation is usually effective
and hence strong. We have not made the child any hungrier
in terms of deprivation. With a given history of deprivation
the behavior of begging for candy shows two levels of
strength under the control of two stimuli. In our experiment
we change from the stimulus which controls the low level to
that which controls the high. Another result then follows. A
small piece of candy, as a discriminative stimulus, evokes
behavior which is usually reinforced, but we have specified
that it is not further reinforced in the present case. Not only
does the child ask for candy; he asks unsuccessfully. This is
the condition for an emotional reaction of "frustration," in
which the child begins to cry and perhaps ends with a
temper tantrum (Chapter X). It is obvious that the child was
free of these behaviors before seeing the candy, but this does
not mean that he was not hungry. If we were to define
hungei in terms of strength of behavior regardless of the
presence or absence of discriminative stimuli, we should
have to agree that a small amount of food increases it. But
the case is not an exception to the present formulation.
We can separate the discriminating and satiating effects of
the candy in several ways. For example, a regimen in which
a child is never given more than a single piece of candy at a
time will eventually extinguish the behavior of asking for
more. As a result, the condition responsible for crying or a
temper tantrum will not arise. A single piece of candy will
have none of the disturbing effects described in this
example, and it should be possible to demonstrate a small
measure of satiation.
A somewhat more important parallel also shows how easily
"drive" is identified with probability of response rather than
with a probability due to deprivation. An individual in
whom sexual behavior is

208

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

at the moment not conspicuous may be aroused by exciting
conversations, pictures, performances, and so on. It is not
correct to say that his sex drive has then been strengthened.
Sexual behavior has been strengthened, but by the
presentation of stimuli appropriate to such behavior rather
than by deprivation.
An operation may have two effects which change the
probability of behavior in the same direction. For example,
when a response has been reinforced consistently with food
but now goes unreinforced for the first time, the probability
due to previous reinforcement is decreased and emotional
changes in behavior characteristic of frustration are
generated. Since the latter include the weakening of any
behavior reinforced with food, the first few responses in
extinction will be followed by a reduction in rate for two
reasons. For a time very few responses will be emitted and
hence very few will go unreinforced. The emotional effect
will therefore not be sustained, and the rate will rise, only to
fall again as further responses go unreinforced. The result is,
as we have seen, an oscillation in rate which gives the
extinction curve a wavelike character.
At first blush it may seem difficult to separate these effects
experimentally. We may, however, demonstrate the
emotional effect by frustrating the organism in some other
connection. We may also make use of the fact that emotional
reactions eventually "adapt out." By repeatedly
extinguishing and reconditioning a response, particularly on
a schedule of intermittent reinforcement, we obtain
extinction curves with little or no interference from
emotional effects. We may also use the fact that an
emotional effect involves the whole repertoire of the
organism, while extinction is fairly narrowly localized in the
response not reinforced. It is possible to record the
frequency of emission of two responses in the same
organism at the same time. If the responses do not use the
same musculature to any great extent, their changes in rate
may show a surprising independence. In the pigeon
experiment pecking a key and stepping on a pedal satisfy
these conditions reasonably well. A somewhat more
convenient arrangement is to suspend the pigeon in a
harness with one leg free; the pecking response and the
flexion of the leg can then be separately but simultaneously
studied. When these two responses have

THE ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX CASES

209

been conditioned, they can be extinguished at the same time
except for a slight delay in one process. The extinction
curves, recorded separately, are slightly displaced in time, but
the major oscillations occur simultaneously. This suggests
that the rise and fall of frustration is a single process in the
whole organism, while the change due to extinction is
separately determined in each response.
MULTIPLE CAUSES
Another way in which independent variables may interact
is of greater importance. Two or more operations may
combine in a common effect. We have already discussed
several examples. An operant may be reinforced in more
than one way, with the result that it varies with more than
one deprivation. This is, in fact, the effect of a generalized
reinforcer. A response so conditioned is not only more likely
to be strong at any given time, because at least one state of
deprivation is likely to prevail, but it may have an especially
high probability of emission if two or more states of
deprivation prevail at the same time. A similar result is
achieved if two or more reinforcements are directly applied
to a single operant. The principle is used when attendance at
the business meeting of a club is encouraged by the serving
of refreshments. Although a member may not attend
because of the refreshments alone or because of
participation in the business meeting alone, he will be more
likely to attend if the probabilities due to both of these
reinforcements are combined.
Emotional variables are frequently combined with
variables in the fields of motivation and conditioning.
Contrary to several well-established views there is no
fundamental opposition between emotion and the
"intellectual" behavior of the discriminated operant.
Behavior is often most vigorous and effective when an
emotional predisposition works in the same direction as a
contingency of reinforcement. This is implied when we say
that "a man's heart is in his work," where "heart" refers to
emotional variables and "work" to contingencies of
reinforcement. The individual in whom aggressive or brutal
behavior is particularly strong may work especially well in
certain kinds of employment—for example, in certain kinds
of police or military work. An actress whose role required
her to slap another

210

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

person in a play slapped with unusual force when she
became angry with him for extraneous reasons. The
individual with an "affectionate" disposition may be
especially successful at jobs which are concerned with
helping other people.
In an important application of this principle, one
discriminative stimulus is combined with another
discriminative stimulus or with other variables. The effects
are of various sorts. Some are commonly called
"suggestion," others are dealt with as "projective
techniques," while still others are important in the field of
perception. Verbal behavior supplies particularly good
examples.1 A single verbal response is especially likely to be
a function of more than one variable because it may be part
of several different repertoires. In simple imitative or echoic
behavior the response is controlled by a verbal stimulus of
similar form—the verbal stimulus "house" evokes the verbal
response "house." When the verbal stimulus is of different
form—as in the word-association experiment—we may
speak of an intraverbal repertoire—the stimulus "home"
evokes the response "house." In reading, the stimulus is a
text—the printed stimulus "HOUSE" evokes the vocal
response "house." A great deal of verbal behavior is
controlled by nonverbal stimuli, as when we name or
describe objects and the properties of objects—an actual
house evokes the response "house." Since a single verbal
response usually comes under the control of variables in all
these fields, in addition to its relation to emotional and
motivational conditions, it is likely to be a function of more
than one variable at a time.
The presence of more than one stimulus variable in verbal
behavior is sometimes dealt with as "multiple meaning."
The term is too narrow for our present purposes, for we
must include contributions of strength from variables which
are usually not included in the "meaning" of a response—for
example, in the echoic response or the textual response to a
printed word. A newspaper article about a convention of
dentists reported that, in order to improve their profession,
the dentists were urging the passage of certain laws "with
teeth
1 For an extensive analysis of verbal behavior from this point of view see B.
F. Skinner, Verbal Behavior, New York, Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc., 1957.

THE ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX CASES

211

in them." The circumstances under which this was written
might have led to alternative responses such as "laws with
appropriate penalties" or "laws which could be enforced."
These responses might have been equally probable if
another profession had been under discussion. The response
"with teeth in them" probably emerged because of the
additional strength of the response "teeth"; a particular
synonym had taken precedence over equivalent forms
because of a multiple causation. Similarly, when a writer
discussing a man who had been in China hunting for pandas
reported that his plans had not "panned out," the expression
appears to have taken precedence over such synonyms as
"worked out," "come to anything," or "materialized," because
of a contribution of strength from the variables responsible
for "panda."
The multiple determination of verbal behavior is the basis
of much wit. The witty response differs from the
unconsciously amusing to the extent that the speaker is able
to respond to the multiple sources of strength and to point
them up by a proper elaboration. We are concerned here
merely with the multiple sources of the witty element, not
with the complete joke. An example is a story told of Dean
Briggs of Harvard. The Dean was speaking at a dinner on an
uncomfortably hot evening. The chairs had recently been
varnished, and when the Dean rose to speak, he found his
coat stuck to the chair. There was a good deal of laughter as
he pulled it loose. When he was at last able to speak, he
began, "I had expected to deliver to you a round
unvarnished tale, but circumstances make it impossible to
fulfill my expectations." The multiple sources of
"unvarnished tale" are essentially the same as those in the
preceding examples, but the Dean was able to construct a
sentence which made the multiple causation of the response
clear to everyone.
All sustained verbal behavior is multiply determined.
When a man begins to speak or write, he creates an
elaborate set of stimuli which alter the strength of other
responses in his repertoire. It is impossible to resist these
supplementary sources of strength. We cannot, for example,
call out a random series of numbers. Various sequences of
numbers are reinforced as we learn to count by ones, twos,
threes, or fives, to recite multiplication tables, to give
telephone numbers, and

212

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

so on. When we call out a first number, therefore, we alter the
probabilities determining the next call. When a series of some
length has been emitted, later numbers may be extremely
powerfully deter mined.
In the same way, any sustained sample of verbal behavior
establishes strong predispositions among the responses still to
come. Our imitative or echoic repertoire produces rhyme,
rhythm, assonance, and alliteration, which may appear simply
as a disturbing singsong or, as in the parallel case of wit, may
be elaborated into poetry. Verbal material we have memorized
and familiar collocations of words in everyday use establish
intraverbal tendencies which add other supplementary
strengths. The literary artist exploits these when he fashions
a poem or constructs a convincing argument. He builds
multiple tendencies in the reader by virtue of which the reader
finds himself unaccountably predisposed to "chime in" with
the rhyming word of a poem or the clinching word of an
argument.
Occasionally, verbal behavior is actually distorted by this
sort of multiple determination. We may be able to give a
plausible account of the variables responsible, but the speech
itself is not always effective. Many years ago a young woman
was asked to speak at a dinner advocating the repeal of the
Prohibition Amendment. It was her first public appearance,
and she was extremely ill at ease. As she rose to speak,
someone placed a microphone in front of her. It was an
unfamiliar and frightening instrument. She decided to throw
herself on the mercy of the audience and plead her
inexperience. Her first words were, "This is the first time I have
ever faced a speakeasy." The intruding "speakeasy," which was
as much a surprise to the speaker as to her delighted audience,
may be traced to several contributing variables: her subject
was in part the evils of the speakeasy, she was concerned with
her own ability to speak easily, and a microphone could be
called a speakeasy in the sense that it enables one to speak to
many people with little effort. We shall see later that the
intruding response may also have reduced aversive
stimulation from the incipient response "microphone." We
could presumably have shown that the stimulus "microphone"
would elicit some of the emotional reflexes which, as in the
case of the lie detector, are typical of aver-

THE ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX CASES

213

sive stimuli. We do not say that the response "microphone"
had a tendency "not to be emitted," but rather that any
response which displaced it would be strong for that reason.
Because of this overwhelming strength, the response broke
into the speech in progress. In spite of the disruption the
sources of strength were so obvious that the total response
was not without an effect, and it was accepted as wit.
A different kind of distortion arises when two or more fairly
similar forms of response are strengthened. One may prevail
as the result of both sources of strength, or a combined form
may be generated. Folk etymologies ("sparrow grass" for
"asparagus") and blends ("smog" for "smoke" and "fog") or
the portmanteau words of Lewis Carroll ("frumious" for
"furious" and "fuming") are examples. Some distortions are
sufficiently effective to survive in the verbal behavior of the
community, but others (such as "urving" for "urge" and
"craving" or "heritage" for "heresy" and "sacrilege") suffer a
sadder fate.
THE PRACTICAL USE
OF MULTIPLE
CAUSATION
Supplementary variables are often used in controlling
behavior. A familiar case is "suggestion," which may be
defined as the use of a stimulus to raise the probability of a
response already assumed to exist at some low value. Verbal
suggestions may be classified according to the kind of
supplementary stimulation. In the imitative or echoic case,
we strengthen a response by supplying stimulation of the
same form. We may call this formal suggestion. When we
strengthen a response with nonverbal stimuli or verbal
stimuli of different form, the suggestion is thematic. A crossclassification may be set up according to whether the
response can or cannot be identified in advance. If we call
the first a "prompt" and the second a "probe," then we have
to consider formal prompts, formal probes, thematic
prompts, and thematic probes.
The formal prompt is the common practice in the theater.
A word whispered in the wings strengthens the verbal
behavior of the actor by setting up an echoic response
which combines with the imper-

214

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

fectly memorized behavior. If the part has not been
memorized at all, the actor repeats what he hears from the
prompter merely as an echoic response. Since there is then
only one source of strength, it is not prompting in the present
sense. It is difficult to be sure of multiple sources if the
prompter supplies the whole passage, but two variables are
obviously at work if he does not. The relative strength of
learned material is shown by how much of a prompt is
required: if the passage has been fairly well memorized, a
very small echoic contribution will suffice. Radio and
television quiz programs use a kind of concealed formal
prompt. The contestant who finds it difficult to answer a
question may be helped if the master of ceremonies makes a
remark containing a word which is similar to the answer. If
the answer is, say, "Washington," the concealed prompt
might contain the word "washing."
A thematic prompt having the same effect would be a
remark containing the words, "Father of his Country." When
we acquire intra-verbal behavior like "Washington was the
Father of his Country," we show an increased tendency to
say "Washington" when "the Father of his Country" is
heard. Neither the formal nor the thematic prompt will be
effective if the response "Washington" does not already
exist in some strength. If the contestant is simply told the
answer and says "Washington," this is echoic behavior, and
no prompting in the present sense has taken place. The
thematic prompt is ordinarily called a "hint." Hinting, as a
type of suggestion, always involves the use of a
supplementary variable in rendering a given response more
probable.
A formal probe which supplements verbal behavior of
unknown form utilizes a process which has long been
familiar. We may be interested in the behavior which it
reveals because of the light which is thrown on other
variables. Ambitious young Dick Whittington, discouraged
by his failure in London, leaves the city, but as he walks
away he hears Bow Bells tolling the words, "Turn again,
Whittington, thrice Lord Mayor of London town." The
stimulus from the bells must have been only vaguely similar
to this response. No one else would have heard them saying
the same thing. The words represent strong responses in the
ambitious Whittington's own behav-

THE ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX CASES

215

ior, to which the echoic supplement supplied by the sound of
the bells gave the strength needed for emission. (The fact
that Whittington heard the bells speak is a separate point to
which we shall return later. The only speaker was
Whittington himself.) The effect has often been used in
literature: a young girl running away from home hears the
click of the wheels of the train saying, "Why are you here?
Why are you here?"; the lapping of water against the side of
a boat whispers, "He speaks the truth. He speaks the truth."
A device called the Verbal Summator, which is used
experimentally and clinically to probe latent verbal
behavior, uses the same process. Vague speech patterns
—"eye-uh-ah-uh" or "oo-ee-uh-uh," for example—are
repeated by a phonograph so softly or against so noisy a
background that they resemble barely audible speech. The
subject is asked to listen to each repeated pattern until he
hears "what is said." The feeble echoic response generated
by the repeated auditory stimulus combines with a verbal
response already in some strength. The resulting response is
often emitted with great confidence. A subject may respond
to hundreds of different patterns while remaining convinced
that they are genuine speech and that he is usually
identifying them correctly. An extensive sample of latent
verbal behavior may thus be collected which, since it bears
little relation to the stimulating situation, must be the
product of other variables in the behavior of the subject. The
clinical use of the material is based upon the assumptionthat these variables—in the fields of reinforcement,
motivation, or emotion—are probably important in
interpreting other behavior of the individual.
A thematic probe is exemplified by the so-called wordassociation experiment. This is similar to the Verbal
Summator except that the supplementary strength is derived
from intraverbal responses. A stimulus word is spoken or
shown to the subject, and he is asked to report "the first word
he thinks of" or, as we should say here, to emit aloud the first
verbal response which appears in his behavior. Many
different responses are strengthened by an intraverbal
stimulus. For example, the stimulus "house" may evoke
"home," "building," "keeper," and so on. Which of these is
emitted at a particular time is presumably determined by a
relatively effective additional source

216

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

of strength. When verbal behavior is collected in this way, it
is possible to infer some of the verbal history of the subject, as
well as current variables responsible for his interests, his
emotional predispositions, and so on. The clinical use of this
material is based upon the assumption that these variables
are relevant in interpreting other behavior. The
supplementary strength of the thematic probe is not always
intraverbal. We may strengthen verbal behavior simply by
presenting pictures, objects, or events and asking our subject
to talk about them.
By asking our subject to talk in a minimal stimulating
situation we generate the condition for what is known as
free association, which does not necessarily exemplify the
present process. The verbal behavior obtained may be
maximally controlled by variables in his history, and
inferences about these variables may be of optimal value; but
since no supplementary source of strength is used, the case is
not classified as either a formal or thematic probe. A great
deal of self-probing may go on, however, when parts of such
a verbal production alter other parts through supplementary
stimulation.
PROJECTION AND IDENTIFICATION
Formal and thematic probes are frequently called
"projective tests," but the word "projection" has a broader
significance. Freud described the process to which it refers as
a way in which repressed wishes work themselves out
(Chapter XXIV). A similar mechanism is called
"identification." Quite apart from any analysis of wishes, we
may classify the behavior in terms of its relevant variables:
certain occasions for verbal or nonverbal behavior join forces
with behavior already in some strength. When we "identify"
ourselves with the hero of a novel, movie, or play, or "throw
ourselves into a character," we simply behave in the same
way—that is, imitatively (Chapter VII). When our imitative
behavior is so microscopic as to be wholly private, a special
problem may arise, as we shall see in Chapter XVII. The
imitative supplement may be either verbal or nonverbal, but
the verbal behavior has several advantages. For example, in
reading a novel we can more easily identify ourselves with
the character who is speaking than with someone behaving
nonverbally because the recorded speech provides

THE ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX CASES

217

a direct source of strength for verbal responses and because
these responses can be executed in any environment. A
widespread preference for conversation in novels seems to be
due to this fact.
The behavior which is executed in identification must have
some strength for other reasons. If the strength is considerable,
we have to explain why the response is not emitted without
supplementation. In a common case the behavior cannot be
emitted in everyday life because the opportunity is lacking
or because the behavior is restrained or punished. A tendency
to identify oneself with, say, a fictional character may be
clinically significant as evidence of the strength of the
behavior. It is often the case, however, that a story simply
builds up a tendency; the author forces a sort of identification,
which is evident in the fact that interest in a character grows
as the story unfolds. Such an identification may have little
bearing upon variables operating elsewhere in the reader's life.
We speak of projection, rather than identification, when
the behavior is less specifically controlled by the
supplementary stimulus. A classic example is the lover who
accuses his beloved of coolness or unfaithfulness because he
himself has grown cool or unfaithful. The lover has reacted
with a response which is formally imitative of the behavior of
the other person but which is controlled by quite different
variables in his own behavior. For example, remaining silent
for some trivial reason is imitated and combined with a gesture
of boredom; a passing comment is echoed and combined
with a critical remark. In what is sometimes called the "old
maid's neurosis," a response which imitates the behavior of an
innocent person is combined with a sexually aggressive
response. The fact that the projector attributes similar
aggressive behavior to the other person is an additional detail
(Chapter XVII).
The possibility of identifying oneself with animals or even
with inanimate objects offers an interesting opportunity to
study the formal properties of behavior. In what way can a
man's behavior resemble the behavior of a cloud or wave or
falling tree so that the imitative response will summate with
other parts of his behavior?

218

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

MULTIPLE VARIABLES IN PERCEPTION
It is only a short step to an issue of some importance in
the field of perception. Our reactions are determined not
only by stimuli, but by supplementary variables in the fields
of emotion, motivation, and reinforcement. If we are
expecting an important telephone call, we may rush to the
phone at the faint sound of a doorbell. This is an example of
stimulus generalization, which can easily be duplicated in
the rat or pigeon. By increasing the deprivation we increase
the range of effective stimuli or, to put it another way, reduce
the importance of differences in stimuli. When a young man
deeply in love mistakes a stranger passing in the street for
his beloved, the strong motivation has made a wider range
of stimuli effective in controlling the response of seeing his
beloved. (We may report that the doorbell "sounded like"
the telephone, and the lover may insist that the girl in the
street "looked like" his beloved, just as Dick Whittington
heard the bells speak rather than himself. What this means
we shall see later.)
VARIABLES WITH INCOMPATIBLE EFFECTS
Two responses which use the same parts of the body in
different ways cannot be emitted together. When two such
responses are strong at the same time, the condition is often
called "conflict." When the incompatible responses are due
to different kinds of deprivation, we speak of a conflict of
motives; when they are due to different reinforcing
contingencies, we speak of a conflict of goals; and so on.
The term suggests an active struggle of some sort inside the
organism— evidently between some of the hypothetical
precursors of behavior. The conflict can scarcely be among
the independent variables since these are physical events,
and any conflict would be resolved at the physical level.
From the present point of view, we must suppose that the
conflict is between responses and that any "struggle" will be
evident in the behavior. If we want to study conflict, then,
we simply strengthen incompatible responses and observe
the result.
Algebraic summation. When incompatible responses
resemble each other in topography except for sign—when, in
other words, they are diametrically opposed to each other—
the result may be "algebraic

THE ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX CASES

219

summation." Simple examples are observed in the postural
reflexes. One reflex may call for the extension of a leg,
another for its flexion. Under certain circumstances the
occurrence of both stimuli at the same time produces an
intermediate position of the leg. A similar opposition is
possible in the discriminative behavior of the whole
organism. A dog approaching a strange object, or a soldier
going into battle, possesses diametrically opposed kinds of
behavior—approach and withdrawal. If no other variables
are to be taken into account, the resulting movement will be
in one direction or the other but at a qualified speed: the
individual will move cautiously forward or slowly retreat.
The combination of variables may, of course, have other
effects; the behavior may be poorly integrated, less skillfully
executed, or, as is always the case with behavior of low
strength, easily disturbed by extraneous variables.
If the resulting movement changes the relative strength of
the variables, the behavior may oscillate. Thus if the
stimulus which induces the dog to approach a strange object
is stronger than that which controls withdrawal, the dog will
approach slowly, but if this strengthens the variable
controlling withdrawal, the direction may at some point be
reversed. If withdrawal in turn weakens the variables
controlling withdrawal or strengthens the variables
controlling approach, a second reversal will occur—and so
on. The oscillation will be slow or rapid depending upon the
extent to which the variables are modified. The hand of the
chess player reaching toward the piece to be moved may
oscillate either slowly with a period of several seconds or
almost as rapidly as in tremor, depending upon the pressure
of the game.
The variables responsible for algebraic summation need
not be stimuli. A man whose "heart is not in his work"
exemplifies an opposition between reinforcing contingencies
and variables in the field of motivation or emotion. Some of
his behavior is due to reinforcement, possibly of an
economic sort, which keeps him at his job. Opposed to this
is behavior which is strong for different reasons. We see this
in the tender-hearted thug, in the idealist caught up in a
profession in which he must exploit or injure people, or in
the pacifist drafted into military service.

220

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

Prepotency. Only rarely will the topography of
incompatible responses permit algebraic summation since in
general one response cannot simply be subtracted from
another. In general, when two responses are strong at the
same time, only one can be emitted. The appearance of one
response is called "prepotency." The term, like algebraic
summation, is borrowed from the study of simple reflexes,
but the principle applies to operant behavior as well. We
appealed to this principle in noting, as an alternative to
extinction or punishment, that we may prevent the
occurrence of a response simply by creating circumstances
which evoke an incompatible response which is prepotent
over it.
The prepotent response does not, merely by virtue of its
having been emitted, alter the strength of the dispossessed
response. It may, however, change some of the variables
controlling this response, and oscillation may then follow.
This is all the more likely because the execution of the
prepotent response usually weakens it—through partial
satiation, for example. A simple instance is the selection of a
necktie. The satiation which follows when a tie is worn is
clearly evident when it reaches the point at which we are
"tired of the tie," but a smaller measure of satiation must be
supposed to occur in a shorter time. In choosing between
two ties, an oscillation may arise since putting on one tie
increases the relative probability of putting on the other. The
oscillation may under certain circumstances become
pathological, as in folie du doute. More important examples
are frequently dealt with in literary works. An ancient
example is the conflict between behavior strengthened by
"love" and behavior due to the ethical pressure which we
speak of as "duty" (Chapter XXI). The execution of
behavior appropriate to either variable changes the relative
strength of the opposed behavior, which then becomes
momentarily prepotent.
The oscillation is rapid if only a slight step in either
direction makes a significant change in probability, as in the
case of the individual who "cannot make up his mind" in
ordering at a restaurant. A very slow oscillation is
exemplified by the individual who turns from one field of
interest to another and back again, perhaps remaining for
years in one field. Sometimes a fairly acceptable solution to
the problem of incompatible behavior is to engage primarily
in one

THE ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX CASES

221

type of response but to interlace one's activity with
responses of another type. This is especially feasible when
the latter are relatively independent of the external
environment: torn between love and duty, one may do one's
duty while continuing to talk about love. The alternative
response may also be executed "in fantasy," as we shall see
in Chapter XVII.
To do or not to do. We are often interested in whether a
response will be emitted in competition with alternative
behavior which is of no importance to us and which we
dismiss as "doing nothing" or as "doing something else."
Such behavior (defined merely as incompatible with a
specified response) appears in the analysis of punishment.
Any response which interferes with punished behavior
reduces a conditioned aversive stimulus and is reinforced for
that reason, but we may have little interest in what the
response is.
There are several kinds of conflict generated by
punishment. An example of a response which is first
reinforced and then punished is eating a delicious but
indigestible food. The two consequences follow from the
chemical properties of the food, which are positively
reinforcing on contact with the tongue but eventually
aversive in the stomach. In eating someone else's food
without his permission, aversive consequences may possibly
be arranged by the owner of the food or by society. The
aversive stimulus may precede the positive reinforcement—
for example, when we swim in cold water for the effect of
the invigorating glow which follows—but in both cases the
aversive stimulus is avoided if the response is not emitted.
The aversive stimulus may follow unless a response is
emitted. When an individual takes steps to prepare for a bad
storm, his behavior reduces the threat of strong aversive
consequences or "avoids" the consequences of the storm, in
the sense of Chapter XI; but a conflict will arise if the
behavior has its own aversive consequences.
It is tempting to formulate these cases without mentioning
the incompatible behavior. We are interested in whether the
indigestible food is eaten, or the plunge taken, or the
preparation for the storm made, not in what may be done
instead. This may lead us to speak of a negative tendency to
engage in the act which is supplanted. One variable
increases the probability of a response while another appears

222

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

to reduce it. But for both theoretical and practical purposes
it is important to remember that we are always dealing with
positive probabilities. Punishment, as we have seen, does
not create a negative probability that a response will be
made but rather a positive probability that incompatible
behavior will occur.
Another example in which it is tempting to speak of
negative probabilities is "Freudian forgetting." The instances
usually described involve punishment. Let us say that an
aversive appointment—with the dentist, for example—is
forgotten. The observed fact is simply that the behavior of
keeping the appointment does not appear under appropriate
circumstances. The theory of Freudian forgetting asserts that
the aversive consequences of such appointments are
relevant. Any step toward keeping the appointment
generates conditioned aversive stimulation because of
earlier painful stimulation in the dentist's chair. Any
behavior which reduces the aversive stimulation by
displacing such a response is automatically reinforced in
accordance with the analysis of Chapter XII. Two mutually
exclusive kinds of behavior are therefore strong, and the
issue is one of prepotency. We have no interest, however, in
specifying the incompatible response. Hence we are likely
to suppose that forgetting means that the probability of
keeping the appointment has reached zero or has passed
through zero to a negative value. But we need not deal with
any behavior called "not keeping the appointment." One
response has simply lost out to another in the matching of
probabilities. If the same result were achieved without
"forgetting" by canceling the appointment, the action which
supplanted the behavior would be clearly specified, and the
principle of prepotency would be obvious. Forgetting is
ordinarily attributed to an inner organism which "represses"
the behavior of keeping the appointment, but the only
repressing agent is the incompatible response.
Just as an additional source of strength may select one
response from a group of responses otherwise all equally
strong, so a sort of "negative selection" may arise from the
strength of behavior which is incompatible with one
response in a group. In the example described above, the
intruding response "speakeasy" could be explained in part by
its effect in displacing the aversive response "microphone."

THE ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX CASES

223

When we are concerned simply with whether a single
response will or will not be emitted, the incompatible
behavior may remain unspecified. The basic process,
emphasized by Freud, has long been recognized. In
Barchester Towers, Anthony Trollope described the
behavior of his hero Mr. Arabin as follows:
But he never could have loved the Signora Neroni as he
felt that he now loved Eleanor! And so he flung stones into
the brook, instead of flinging himself in, and sat down on its
margin as sad a gentleman as you shall meet in a summer's day.
We cannot account for suicide as a simple response. We
cannot, for example, measure its frequency. No one jumps
into a brook to bring his life to an end because the same
behavior has had a similar consequence in the past. But the
general behavior of throwing objects into water is another
matter. It has a specifiable result: the objects disappear. This
behavior is readily generalized; having thrown an old hat into
a brook, we get rid of a pair of shoes in the same way. It is
not impossible that throwing oneself into a brook may be
merely a dramatic example of destroying oneself with the
behavior which has destroyed other things. Fortunately we
need not decide this issue to make the present point. Both
Trollope and Freud agree that Mr. Arabin in flinging stones
into the brook was to some extent flinging himself in.
Circumstances had given rise to a strong tendency to "throw
things into brooks," but aversive consequences were also
attached to some responses in this class. Mr. Arabin does not
fling himself into the brook (or, with less aversive
consequences, his watch or his pocketbook); he flings
stones. This response may have only a tenuous membership
in the strengthened group, but at least it has no aversive
consequences and hence is emitted. (The same aversive
consequences generate the familiar oscillation of the potential
suicide, as Hamlet demonstrated.)
In these examples of incompatible behavior, we have
considered the outcome when nothing intervenes. Obviously
a sudden change in circumstances might yield a different
result, and, as we shall see in a moment, the individual
himself may effect such a change. Before analyzing how he
does so, it is necessary to consider another way in which
variables may be arranged.

224

THE ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR

CHAINING
A response may produce or alter some of the variables
which control another response. The result is a "chain." It
may have little or no organization. When we go for a walk,
roaming the countryside or wandering idly through a
museum or store, one episode in our behavior generates
conditions responsible for another. We look to one side and
are stimulated by an object which causes us to move in its
direction. In the course of this movement we receive
aversive stim-u-lation from which we beat a hasty retreat.
This generates a condition of satiation or fatigue in which,
once free of aversive stimulation, we sit down to rest. And so
on. Chaining need not be the result of movement in space.
We wander or roam verbally, for example, in a casual
conversation or when we "speak our thoughts" in free
association.
Some chains have a functional unity. The links have
occurred in more or less the same order, and the whole chain
has been affected by a single consequence. We often deal
with a chain as a single "response." When a cat pounces on
a mouse, for example, this complicated act is an intricate
network of postural reflexes, as the physiologist Magnus
first showed. We often emphasize the initiating member (to
jump or not to jump), overlooking the fact that it precedes
by several stages the response which is actually reinforced
by contact with the mouse. Long chains organized as simple
sequences are exhibited as we pick our way through streets
to a particular spot, or recite a poem, or play a piece of
music. Other examples have been discussed in connection
with conditioned reinforcement. Organized chains are not
necessarily confined to the production of stimuli since other
sorts of variables may be altered by behavior. In drinking a
glass of water we change an important condition of
deprivation which has the usual effect of making further
drinking less probable, and behavior which has been
suppressed by behavior which has led to drinking may then
be released. A special kind of chaining is represented by
behavior which alters the strength of other behavior and is
reinforced because it does so. Such behavior could almost
be said to distinguish the human organism from all others.
In Section III we shall consider some of the more important
problems which it raises.

SECTION

III

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A
WHOLE

CHAPTER XV

"SELF-CONTROL"

THE "SELF-DETERMINATION" OF CONDUCT
Implicit in a functional analysis is the notion of
control. When we discover an independent variable which
can be controlled, we discover a means of controlling the
behavior which is a function of it. This fact is important for
theoretical purposes. Proving the validity of a functional
relation by an actual demonstration of the effect of one
variable upon another is the heart of experimental science.
The practice enables us to dispense with many troublesome
statistical techniques in testing the importance of variables.
The practical implications are probably even greater. An
analysis of the techniques through which behavior may be
manipulated shows the kind of technology which is
emerging as the science advances, and it points up the
considerable degree of control which is currently exerted.
The problems raised by the control of human behavior
obviously can no longer be avoided by refusing to recognize
the possibility of control. Later sections of this book will
consider these practical implications in more detail. In
Section IV, for example, in an analysis of what is generally
called social behavior, we shall see how one organism
utilizes the basic processes of behavior to control
227

228

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

another. The result is particularly impressive when the
individual is under the concerted control of a group. Our
basic processes are responsible for the procedures .through
which the ethical group controls the behavior of each of its
members. An even more effective control is exerted by such
well-defined agencies as government, religion, psychotherapy,
economics, and education; certain key questions concerning
such control will be considered in Section V. The general
issue of control in human affairs will be summarized in
Section VI.
First, however, we must consider the possibility that the
individual may control his own behavior. A common
objection to a picture of the behaving organism such as we
have so far presented runs somewhat as follows. In
emphasizing the controlling power of external variables, we
have left the organism itself in a peculiarly helpless position.
Its behavior appears to be simply a "repertoire"—a
vocabulary of action, each item of which becomes more or
less probable as the environment changes. It is true that
variables may be arranged in complex patterns; but this fact
does not appreciably modify the picture, for the emphasis is
still upon behavior, not upon the behaver. Yet to a
considerable extent an individual does appear to shape his
own destiny. He is often able to do something about the
variables affecting him. Some degree of "self-determination"
of conduct is usually recognized in the creative behavior of
the artist and scientist, in the self-exploratory behavior of
the writer, and in the self-discipline of the ascetic. Humbler
versions of self-determination are more familiar. The
individual "chooses" between alternative courses of action,
"thinks through" a problem while isolated from the relevant
environment, and guards his health or his position in society
through the exercise of "self-control."
Any comprehensive account of human behavior must, of
course, embrace the facts referred to in statements of this
sort. But we can achieve this without abandoning our
program. When a man controls himself, chooses a course of
action, thinks out the solution to a problem, or strives toward
an increase in self-knowledge, he is behaving. He controls
himself precisely as he would control the behavior of
anyone else—through the manipulation of variables of
which behavior is a function. His behavior in so doing is a
proper object of

“SELF-CONTROL”

229

analysis, and eventually it must be accounted for with
variables lying outside the individual himself.
It is the purpose of Section III to analyze how the
individual acts to alter the variables of which other parts of
his behavior are functions, to distinguish among the various
cases which arise in terms of the processes involved, and to
account for the behavior which achieves control just as we
account for behavior of any other kind. The present chapter
concerns the processes involved in self-control, taking that
term in close to its traditional sense, while Chapter XVI
concerns behavior which would traditionally be described as
creative thinking. The two sets of techniques are different
because in self-control the individual can identify the
behavior to be controlled while in creative thinking he
cannot. The variables which the individual utilizes in
manipulating his behavior in this way are not always
accessible to others, and this has led to great
misunderstanding. It has often been concluded, for example,
that self-discipline and thinking take place in a nonphysical
inner world and that neither activity is properly described as
behavior at all. We may simplify the analysis by considering
examples of self-control and thinking in which the
individual manipulates external variables, but we shall need
to complete the picture by discussing the status of private
events in a science of behavior (Chapter XVII). A purely
private event would have no place in a study of behavior, or
perhaps in any science; but events which are, for the
moment at least, accessible only to the individual himself
often occur as links in chains of otherwise public events and
they must then be considered. In self-control and creative
thinking, where the individual is largely engaged in
manipulating his own behavior, this is likely to be the case.
When we say that a man controls himself, we must
specify who is controlling whom. When we say that he
knows himself, we must also distinguish between the subject
and object of the verb. Evidently selves are multiple and
hence not to be identified with the biological organism. But
if this is so, what are they? What are their dimensions in a
science of behavior? To what extent is a self an integrated
personality or organism? How can one self act upon
another? The interlocking systems of responses which
account for self-control and

230

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

thinking make it possible to answer questions of this sort
satisfactorily, as we shall see in Chapter XVIII. We can do
this more conveniently, however, when the principal data
are at hand. Meanwhile, the term "self" will be used in a less
rigorous way.
"SELF-CONTROL"
The individual often comes to control part of his own
behavior when a response has conflicting consequences—
when it leads to both positive and negative reinforcement.
Drinking alcoholic beverages, for example, is often
followed by a condition of unusual confidence in which one
is more successful socially and in which one forgets
responsibilities, anxieties, and other troubles. Since this is
positively reinforcing, it increases the likelihood that
drinking will take place on future occasions. But there are
other consequences—the physical illness of the "hang-over"
and the possibly disastrous effects of overconfident or
irresponsible behavior—which are negatively reinforcing
and, when contingent upon behavior, represent a form of
punishment. If punishment were simply the reverse of
reinforcement, the two might combine to produce an
intermediate tendency to drink, but we have seen that this is
not the case. When a similar occasion arises, the same or an
increased tendency to drink will prevail; but the occasion as
well as the early stages of drinking will generate conditioned
aversive stimuli and emotional responses to them which we
speak of as shame or guilt. The emotional responses may
have some deterrent effect in weakening behavior—as by
"spoiling the mood." A more important effect, however, is
that any behavior which weakens the behavior of drinking is
automatically reinforced by the resulting reduction in
aversive stimulation. We have discussed the behavior of
simply "doing something else," which is reinforced because
it displaces punishable behavior, but there are other
possibilities. The organism may make the punished response
less probable by altering the variables of which it is a
function. Any behavior which succeeds in doing this will
automatically be reinforced. We call such behavior selfcontrol.
The positive and negative consequences generate two
responses

“SELF-CONTROL”

231

which are related to each other in a special way: one
response, the controlling response, affects variables in such
a way as to change the probability of the other, the
controlled response. The controlling response may
manipulate any of the variables of which the controlled
response is a function; hence there are a good many
different forms of self-control. In general it is possible to
point to parallels in which the same techniques are
employed in controlling the behavior of others. A fairly
exhaustive survey at this point will illustrate the process of
self-control and at the same time serve to summarize the
kind of control to be emphasized in the chapters which
follow.
TECHNIQUES OF CONTROL
Physical restraint and physical aid. We commonly
control behavior through physical restraint. With locked
doors, fences, and jails we limit the space in which people
move. With strait-jackets, gags, and arm braces we limit the
movement of parts of their bodies. The individual controls
his own behavior in the same way. He claps his hand over
his mouth to keep himself from laughing or coughing or to
stifle a verbal response which is seen at the last moment to
be a "bad break." A child psychologist has suggested that a
mother who wishes to keep from nagging her child should
seal her own lips with adhesive tape. The individual may
jam his hands into his pockets to prevent fidgeting or nailbiting or hold his nose to keep from breathing when under
water. He may present himself at the door of an institution
for incarceration to control his own criminal or psychotic
behavior. He may cut his right hand off lest it offend him.
In each of these examples we identify a controlling
response, which imposes some degree of physical restraint
upon a response to be controlled. To explain the existence
and strength of the controlling behavior we point to the
reinforcing circumstances which arise when the response
has been controlled. Clapping the hand over the mouth is
reinforced and will occur again under similar circumstances
because it reduces the aversive stimulation generated by the
cough or the incipient bad break. In the sense of Chapter
XII, the controlling response avoids the negatively
reinforcing consequences of the con-

232

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

trolled response. The aversive consequences of a bad break
are supplied by a social environment; the aversive
consequences of breathing under water do not require the
mediation of others.
Another form of control through physical restraint is
simply to move out of the situation in which the behavior to
be controlled may take place. The parent avoids trouble by
taking an aggressive child away from other children, and the
adult controls himself in the same way. Unable to control his
anger, he simply walks away. This may not control the
whole emotional pattern, but it does restrain those features
which are likely to have serious consequences.
Suicide is another form of self-control. Obviously a man
does not kill himself because he has previously escaped from
an aversive situation by doing so. As we have already seen,
suicide is not a form of behavior to which the notion of
frequency of response can be applied. If it occurs, the
components of the behavior must have been strengthened
separately. Unless this happens under circumstances in
which frequency is an available datum, we cannot say
meaningfully that a man is "likely or unlikely to kill
himself"—nor can the individual say this of himself
(Chapter XVII). Some instances of suicide, but by no means
all, follow the pattern of cutting off one's right hand that it
may not offend one; the military agent taken by the enemy
may use this method to keep himself from divulging secrets
of state.
A variation on this mode of control consists of removing
the situation, so to speak, rather than the individual. A
government stops inflationary spending by heavy taxation—
by removing the money or credit which is a condition for the
purchase of goods. A man arranges to control the behavior of
his spendthrift heir by setting up a trust fund. Noncoeducational institutions attempt to control certain kinds of
sexual behavior by making the opposite sex inaccessible. The
individual may use the same techniques in controlling
himself. He may leave most of his pocket money at home to
avoid spending it, or he may drop coins into a piggy bank
from which it is difficult to withdraw them. He may put his
own money in trust for himself. H. G. Wells's Mr. Polly used
a similar procedure to distribute his funds over a walking
trip. He would mail all but a pound note to himself at a
village some distance along his route. Arriving at the
village, he

“SELF-CONTROL”

233

would call at the post office, remove a pound note, and
readdress the balance to himself at a later point.
In a converse technique we increase the probability of a
desirable form of behavior by supplying physical aid. We
facilitate human behavior, make it possible, or expand and
amplify its consequences with various sorts of equipment,
tools, and machines. When the problem of self-control is to
generate a given response, we alter our own behavior in the
same way by obtaining favorable equipment, making funds
readily available, and so on.
Changing the stimulus. Insofar as the preceding techniques
operate through physical aid or restraint, they are not based
upon a behavioral process. There are associated processes,
however, which may be analyzed more accurately in terms of
stimulation. Aside from making a response possible of
impossible, we may create or eliminate the occasion for it.
To do so, we manipulate either an eliciting or a discriminative
stimulus. When a drug manufacturer reduces the probability
that a nauseous medicine will be regurgitated by enclosing it in
tasteless capsules—or by "sugar-coating the pill"—he is simply
removing a stimulus which elicits unwanted responses. The
same procedure is available in the control of one's own reflexes.
We swallow a medicine quickly and "chase" it with a glass of
water to reduce comparable stimuli.
We remove discriminative stimuli when we turn away
from a stimulus which induces aversive action. We may
forcibly look away from a wallpaper design which evokes the
compulsive behavior of tracing geometrical patterns. We may
close doors or draw curtains to eliminate distracting stimuli or
achieve the same effect by closing our eyes or putting our
fingers in our ears. We may put a box of candy out of sight
to avoid overeating. This sort of self-control is described as
"avoiding temptation," especially when the aversive
consequences have been arranged by society. It is the principle
of "Get thee behind me, Satan."
We also present stimuli because of the responses they
elicit or make more probable in our own behavior. We rid
ourselves of poisonous or indigestible food with an emetic—
a substance which generates stimuli which elicit vomiting.
We facilitate stimulation

234

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

when we wear eyeglasses or hearing aids. We arrange a
discriminative stimulus to encourage our own behavior at a later
date when we tie a string on our finger or make an entry in a
date book to serve as the occasion for action at an
appropriate time. Sometimes we present stimuli because the
resulting behavior displaces behavior to be controlled—we
"distract" ourselves just as we distract others from a situation
which generates undesirable behavior. We amplify stimuli
generated by our own behavior when we use a mirror to acquire
good carriage or to master a difficult dance step, or study
moving pictures of our own behavior to improve our skill in a
sport, or listen to phonograph recordings of our own speech to
improve pronunciation or delivery.
Conditioning and extinction provide other ways of
changing the effectiveness of stimuli. We arrange for the future
effect of a stimulus upon ourselves by pairing it with other
stimuli, and we extinguish reflexes by exposing ourselves to
conditioned stimuli when they are not accompanied by
reinforcement. If we blush, sweat, or exhibit some other
emotional response under certain circumstances because of an
unfortunate episode, we may expose ourselves to these
circumstances under more favorable conditions in order that
extinction may take place.
Depriving and satiating. An impecunious person may
make the most of an invitation to dinner by skipping lunch
and thus creating a high state of deprivation in which he will
eat a great deal. Conversely, he may partially satiate himself
with a light lunch before going to dinner in order to make the
strength of his ingestive behavior less conspicuous. When a
guest prepares himself for an assiduous host by drinking a
large amount of water before going to a cocktail party, he uses
self-satiation as a measure of control.
Another use is less obvious. In Women in Love, D. H.
Lawrence describes a practice of self-control as follows:
A very great doctor . . . told me that to cure oneself of a bad habit, one
should force oneself to do it, when one would not do it;—make oneself do it
—and then the habit would disappear. . . . If you bite your nails, for
example, then when you don't want to bite your nails, bite them, make
yourself bite them. And you would find the habit was broken.

“SELF-CONTROL”

235

This practice falls within the present class if we regard the
behavior of "deliberately" biting one's finger nails, or biting a
piece of celluloid or similar material, as automatically satiating.
The practice obviously extends beyond what are usually
called "bad habits." For example, if we are unable to work at
our desk because of a conflicting tendency to go for a walk, a
brisk walk may solve the problem-through satiation.
A variation on this practice is to satiate one form of
behavior by engaging in a somewhat similar form. Heavy
exercise is often recommended in the control of sexual
behavior on the assumption that exercise has enough in
common with sexual behavior to produce a sort of
transferred satiation. (The effect is presumed to be due to
topographical overlap rather than sheer exhaustion.) A similar
overlap may account for a sort of transferred deprivation. The
practice of leaving the table while still hungry has been
recommended as a way of generating good work habits.
Presumably for the same reason the vegetarian may be
especially alert and highly efficient because he is, in a sense,
always hungry. Self-deprivation in the field of sex has been
asserted to have valuable consequences in distantly related
fields— for example, in encouraging literary or artistic
achievements. Possibly the evidence is weak; if the effect does
not occur, we have so much the less to explain.
Manipulating emotional conditions. We induce emotional
changes in ourselves for purposes of control. Sometimes this
means simply presenting or removing stimuli. For example, we
reduce or eliminate unwanted emotional reactions by going
away for a "change of scene" —that is, by removing stimuli
which have acquired the power to evoke emotional reactions
because of events which have occurred in connection with
them. We sometimes prevent emotional behavior by eliciting
incompatible responses with appropriate stimuli, as when we
bite our tongue to keep from laughing on a solemn occasion.
We also control the predispositions which must be
distinguished from emotional responses (Chapter X). A
master of ceremonies on a television program predisposes his
studio audience toward laughter before going on the air—
possibly by telling jokes which are not permissible on the air.
The same procedure is available in self-control.

236

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

We get ourselves into a "good mood" before a dull or trying
appointment to increase the probability that we shall behave
in a socially acceptable fashion. Before asking the boss for a
raise, we screw our courage to the sticking place by rehearsing
a history of injustice. We reread an insulting letter just before
answering it in order to generate the emotional behavior which
will make the answer more easily written and more effective.
We also engender strong emotional states in which
undesirable behavior is unlikely or impossible. A case in point
is the practice described vulgarly as "scaring the hell out of
someone." This refers almost literally to a method of
controlling strongly punished behavior by reinstating stimuli
which have accompanied punishment. We use the same
technique when we suppress our own behavior by
rehearsing past punishments or by repeating proverbs which
warn of the wages of sin.
We reduce the extent of an emotional reaction by delaying it
—for example, by "counting ten" before acting in anger. We
get the same effect through the process of adaptation,
described in Chapter X, when we gradually bring ourselves
into contact with disturbing stimuli. We may learn to handle
snakes without fear by beginning with dead or drugged
snakes of the least disturbing sort and gradually moving on
to livelier and more frightening kinds.
Using aversive stimulation. When we set an alarm clock,
we arrange for a strongly aversive stimulus from which we
can escape only by arousing ourselves. By putting the clock
across the room, we make certain that the behavior of escape
will fully awaken us. We condition aversive reactions in
ourselves by pairing stimuli in appropriate ways—for
example, by using the "cures" for the tobacco and alcohol
habits already described. We also control ourselves by
creating verbal stimuli which have an effect upon us
because of past aversive consequences paired with them by
other people. A simple command is an aversive stimulus—a
threat—specifying the action which will bring escape. In
getting out of bed on a cold morning, the simple repetition of
the command "Get up" may, surprisingly, lead to action. The
verbal response is easier than getting up and easily takes
precedence over it, but the reinforcing contingencies
established by the verbal community may prevail. In a sense
the individual

“SELF-CONTROL”

237

"obeys himself." Continued use of this technique may lead
to a finer discrimination between commands issued by
oneself and by others, which may interfere with the result.
We prepare aversive stimuli which will control our own
future behavior when we make a resolution. This is
essentially a prediction concerning our own behavior. By
making it in the presence of people who supply aversive
stimulation when a prediction is not fulfilled, we arrange
consequences which are likely to strengthen the behavior
resolved upon. Only by behaving as predicted can we
escape the aversive consequences of breaking our
resolution. As we shall see later, the aversive stimulation
which leads us to keep the resolution may eventually be
supplied automatically by our own behavior. The resolution
may then be effective even in the absence of other people.
Drugs. We use drugs which simulate the effect of other
variables in self-control. Through the use of anesthetics,
analgesics, and soporifics we reduce painful or distracting
stimuli which cannot otherwise be altered easily. Appetizers and
aphrodisiacs are sometimes used in the belief that they
duplicate the effects of deprivation in the fields of hunger and
sex, respectively. Other drugs are used for the opposite effects.
The conditioned aversive stimuli in "guilt" are counteracted
more or less effectively with alcohol. Typical patterns of
euphoric behavior are generated by morphine and related drugs,
and to a lesser extent by caffeine and nicotine.
Operant conditioning. The place of operant reinforcement
in self-control is not clear. In one sense, all reinforcements are
self-administered since a response may be regarded as
"producing" its reinforcement, but "reinforcing one's own
behavior" is more than this. It is also more than simply
generating circumstances under which a given type of behavior
is characteristically reinforced—for example, by associating with
friends who reinforce only "good" behavior. This is simply a
chain of responses, an early member of which (associating
with a particular friend) is strong because it leads to the
reinforcement of a later member (the "good" behavior).
Self-reinforcement of operant behavior presupposes that the
individual has it in his power to obtain reinforcement but does
not do so

238

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

until a particular response has been emitted. This might be
the case if a man denied himself all social contacts until he
had finished a particular job. Something of this sort
unquestionably happens, but is it operant reinforcement? It is
certainly roughly parallel to the procedure in conditioning the
behavior of another person. But it must be remembered that
the individual may at any moment drop the work in hand
and obtain the reinforcement. We have to account for his not
doing so. It may be that such indulgent behavior has been
punished—say, with disapproval—except when a piece of
work has just been completed. The indulgent behavior will
therefore generate strong aversive stimulation except at such
a time. The individual finishes the work in order to indulge
himself free of guilt (Chapter XII). The ultimate question is
whether the consequence has any strengthening effect upon
the behavior which precedes it. Is the individual more likely to
do a similar piece of work in the future? It would not be
surprising if he were not, although we must agree that he has
arranged a sequence of events in which certain behavior has
been followed by a reinforcing event.
A similar question arises as to whether one can extinguish
one's own behavior. Simply emitting a response which is not
reinforced is not self-control, nor is behavior which simply
brings the individual into circumstances under which a
particular form of behavior will go unreinforced. Selfextinction seems to mean that a controlling response must
arrange the lack of consequence; the individual must step in
to break the connection between response and reinforcement.
This appears to be done when, for example, a television set is
put out of order so that the response of turning the switch is
extinguished. But the extinction here is trivial; the primary
effect is the removal of a source of stimulation.
Punishment. Self-punishment raises the same question. An
individual may stimulate himself aversively, as in selfflagellation. But punishment is not merely aversive
stimulation; it is aversive stimulation which is contingent
upon a given response. Can the individual arrange this
contingency? It is not self-punishment simply to engage in
behavior which is punished, or to seek out circumstances in
which certain behavior is punished. The individual appears to
punish him-

“SELF-CONTROL”

239

self when, having recently engaged in a given sort of
behavior, he injures himself. Behavior of this sort has been
said to show a "need for punishment." But we can account
for it in another way if in stimulating himself aversively, the
individual escapes from an even more aversive condition of
guilt (Chapter XII).
There are other variations in the use of aversive selfstimulation. A man concerned with reducing his weight may
draw his belt up to a given notch and allow it to stay there in
spite of a strong aversive effect. This may directly increase
the conditioned and unconditioned aversive stimuli
generated in the act of overeating and may provide for an
automatic reinforcement for eating with restraint. But we
must not overlook the fact that a very simple response—
loosening the belt —will bring escape from the same
aversive stimulation. If this behavior is not forthcoming, it
is because it has been followed by even more aversive
consequences arranged by society or by a physician— a
sense of guilt or a fear of illness or death. The ultimate
question of aversive self-stimulation is whether a practice of
this sort shows the effect which would be generated by the
same stimulation arranged by others.
"Doing something else." One technique of self-control
which has no parallel in the control of others is based upon
the principle of prepotency. The individual may keep
himself from engaging in behavior which leads to
punishment by energetically engaging in something else. A
simple example is avoiding flinching by a violent response
of holding still. Holding still is not simply "not-flinching."
It is a response which, if executed strongly enough, is
prepotent over the flinching response. This is close to the
control exercised by others when they generate incompatible
behavior. But where another person can do this only by
arranging external variables, the individual appears to
generate the behavior, so to speak, simply by executing it.
A familiar example is talking about something else in order
to avoid a particular topic. Escape from the aversive
stimulation generated by the topic appears to be responsible
for the strength of the verbal behavior which displaces it
(Chapter XXIV).
In the field of emotion a more specific form of "doing
something else" may be especially effective. Emotions tend
to fall into pairs—

240

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

fear and anger, love and hate—according to the direction of
the behavior which is strengthened. We may modify a man's
behavior in fear by making him angry. His behavior is not
simply doing something else; it is in a sense doing the
opposite. The result is not prepotency but algebraic
summation. The effect is exemplified in self-control when
we alter an emotional predisposition by practicing the
opposite emotion—reducing the behavorial pattern in fear
by practicing anger or nonchalance, or avoiding the ravages
of hatred by "loving our enemies."
THE ULTIMATE SOURCE OF CONTROL
A mere survey of the techniques of self-control does not
explain why the individual puts them into effect. This
shortcoming is all too apparent when we undertake to
engender self-control. It is easy to tell an alcoholic that he
can keep himself from drinking by throwing away available
supplies of alcohol; the principal problem is to get him to do
it. We make this controlling behavior more probable by
arranging special contingencies of reinforcement. By
punishing drinking—perhaps merely with "disapproval"—
we arrange for the automatic reinforcement of behavior
which controls drinking because such behavior then reduces
conditioned aversive stimulation. Some of these additional
consequences are supplied by nature, but in general they are
arranged by the community. This is indeed the whole point
of ethical training (Chapter XXI). It appears, therefore, that
society is responsible for the larger part of the behavior of
self-control. If this is correct, little ultimate control remains
with the individual. A man may spend a great deal of time
designing his own life—he may choose the circumstances in
which he is to live with great care, and he may manipulate
his daily environment on an extensive scale. Such activity
appears to exemplify a high order of self-determination. But
it is also behavior, and we account for it in terms of other
variables in the environment and history of the individual. It
is these variables which provide the ultimate control.
This view is, of course, in conflict with traditional
treatments of the subject, which are especially likely to cite
self-control as an important example of the operation of
personal responsibility. But

“SELF-CONTROL”

241

an analysis which appeals to external variables makes the
assumption of an inner originating and determining agent
unnecessary. The scientific advantages of such an analysis
are many, but the practical advantages may well be even
more important. The traditional conception of what is
happening when an individual controls himself has never
been successful as an educational device. It is of little help to
tell a man to use his "will power" or his "self-control." Such
an exhortation may make self-control slightly more probable
by establishing additional aversive consequences of failure to
control, but it does not help anyone to understand the actual
processes. An alternative analysis of the behavior of control
should make it possible to teach relevant techniques as easily
as any other technical repertoire. It should also improve the
procedures through which society maintains self-controlling
behavior in strength. As a science of behavior reveals more
clearly the variables of which behavior is a function, these
possibilities should be greatly increased.
It must be remembered that formulae expressed in terms of
personal responsibility underlie many of our present techniques
of control and cannot be abruptly dropped. To arrange a
smooth transition is in itself a major problem. But the point
has been reached where a sweeping revision of the concept of
responsibility is required, not only in a theoretical analysis of
behavior, but for its practical consequences as well. We shall
return to this point in Sections V and VI.

CHAPTER XVI

THINKING
THE BEHAVIOR OF
MAKING A DECISION
In self-control the alternative courses of action are
specifiable in advance, and the issue is resolved before
control is exerted. The techniques of control can be
efficiently designed to achieve a particular state of affairs.
There are instances of the manipulation of one's own
behavior, however, in which the outcome cannot be
predicted. Some sort of "self-determination" is involved, for
example, in deciding which of two courses of action is to be
followed. The task is not simply to make a selected course of
action probable but to decide an issue. The individual
sometimes does this by manipulating some of the variables
of which his behavior is a function. The techniques are more
limited than in self-control because the outcome cannot be
specified in advance.
In making a decision, as in self-control, the manipulated
variables are often private events within the organism. As
such they present a special problem, to which we shall
return in Chapter XVII. Familiar instances in which the
variables are accessible to everyone will suffice here. The
processes appear to be the same whether the variables are
public or private. "Making a decision" also resembles selfcontrol in
242

THINKING

243

that some of the techniques are used in essentially the same
way in controlling the behavior of others. This is not true
when we persuade someone to behave in a given way since
our variables operate in favor of a single alternative, and no
decision is involved. When we attempt to help someone
"make up his mind" without prejudice to any course of
action, however, we employ the techniques which the
individual may use upon himself in reaching a decision.
Although variables in the field of motivation and
conditioning are used in making a decision, they are less
specific and their effect is often delayed. For more direct
results we resort to the manipulation of stimuli. If all
relevant courses of action show some strength before we
decide among them, our techniques consist of finding
supplementary sources of strength which, when applied to
the behavior of others, would be classified as prompting or
probing (Chapter XIV). In deciding whether to spend our
vacation in the mountains or at the seashore, for example,
we may pore over travel magazines and vacation booklets,
find out where our friends are going and what weather is
predicted for each place, and so on. This material may, if
we are unlucky, simply maintain the balance between the
two courses of action, but it is more likely to lead to the
prepotent emergence of one of them. "Deciding," as the
term will be used here, is not the execution of the act
decided upon but the preliminary behavior responsible for
it.
The process of deciding may come to an end before the act
is executed when some relatively irrevocable step is taken
—for example, we may decide about the vacation by
making a down payment to hold a reservation. A common
conclusion is simply to announce our decision. By saying
that we are going to the seashore, we insure aversive
consequences if this prediction of our future behavior is not
fulfilled. The new variable may prevent the reinstatement of
any 'conflict and hence of any further behavior of deciding.
Deciding is also brought to an end when the techniques
begin to be applied toward a single outcome—when we
throw away the pamphlets de scribing the seashore and
continue to work to strengthen the behavior of going to the
mountains. We are then behaving as if we had been told to
go to the mountains for our health and were simply

244

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

accumulating material which made it possible to carry out the
order (perhaps in competition with aversive variables which
strengthened staying home or going elsewhere).
ORIGIN AND MAINTENANCE
OF THE BEHAVIOR OF
DECIDING
The individual manipulates relevant variables in making a
decision because the behavior of doing so has certain
reinforcing consequences. One of these is simply escape from
indecision. Conflicting alternatives lead to an oscillation
between incomplete forms of response which, by occupying a
good deal of the individual's time, may be strongly aversive.
Any behavior which brings this conflict to an end will be
positively reinforced. What we may distinguish as "due
deliberation" has other consequences. When we look a
situation over carefully in the course of making a decision, we
presumably increase the probability that the response
eventually made will achieve maximal reinforcement. In the
long run the net gain may be enough to maintain the strength
of the behavior of looking over the situation.
Escape from indecision or the net advantage of a
deliberated response may seem inadequate to explain the
origin and maintenance of the behavior of deciding. They are
certainly defective reinforcers, for they may be long delayed
and their connection with a response may be obscure. We may
readily admit these deficiencies, however, for the behavior of
making decisions is also usually deficient. It is not present in
any degree in the behavior of lower organisms or of many
people. When present, it is usually the result of special
reinforcements applied by the community. Though the
individual may accidentally hit upon various ways of
deciding, it is more likely that he will be taught relevant
techniques. We teach a child to "stop and think" and to
"consider all the consequences" by supplying additional,
and to some extent irrelevant or spurious, reinforcements
(Chapter XXVI). Even these may not be successful. The child
may still find it difficult to "make up his mind" and may
occasionally experience the pathological condition of folie du
doute or some version of the plight of Buridan's ass.

THINKING

245

THE BEHAVIOR OF RECALL
In making a decision the alternative courses of action can
be specified in advance, even though the outcome cannot be
foreseen. Are there circumstances under which an individual
manipulates variables to affect a response which he cannot
identify until it is emitted? At first glance this may seem not
only improbable but impossible. Nevertheless it is done—
and done extensively. Let us suppose that we have forgotten
the name of a man we must shortly introduce to someone.
Since the response cannot be specified in advance, the usual
techniques of self-determination may seem not to apply.
There is, indeed, nothing we can do unless we have a lead of
some sort. But not being able to identify a response does not
mean that we cannot make other statements about it or
manipulate conditions relevant to it. We may be able to say,
for example, that it is a name we once knew, that it is a
name which will be correct in introducing a particular
person, that we shall probably recognize it at once as correct,
or that it is the name of a man whom we met on a particular
occasion and with whom we discussed a particular subject.
With these extra specifications it is not impossible to work
upon oneself in order to strengthen the response. The
available techniques should be classified as self-probes
(Chapter XIV). (A self-prompt would presuppose that we
could identify the response.)
The techniques are familiar. We use thematic probes when
we review a conversation we had with the man in question,
when we describe the circumstances under which we were
introduced to him, or when we review thematic
classifications (was it a German name, an Irish name, an
unusual name, and so on?). We use formal probes when we
try various stress patterns—ta-da-ta-dada—or recite the
alphabet repetitively in a form of verbal summation. We
may even set up an aversive condition from which we can
escape only by emitting the name. This is done in rehearsing
a formal introduction—"I'd like to have you meet
Mr. . . ."—or by embarking upon the actual introduction,
counting upon the powerful pressure which will arise when
the appropriate point is reached to produce the name. If, as
the result of any of these procedures, the name "suddenly
pops

246

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

into our head," then a response has been strengthened which
could not be specified in advance.
PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS
In recalling a name it is assumed that the response exists in
some strength and that other information is available as a
source of supplementary stimulation. These are the essential
features of a broader and generally more complex activity
commonly called "problem-solving," "thinking," or
"reasoning." The analysis of recalling a name thus serves as a
preface to a much more important field of human behavior.
The language in which problem-solving is usually discussed
does not differ much from the layman's vocabulary. The
rigorous concepts and methods developed in other areas of
human behavior are commonly abandoned when this field is
reached. It is easy to give an example of a problem, but it is
difficult to define the term rigorously. There appears to be no
problem for the organism which is not in a state of
deprivation or aversive stimulation, but something more is
involved. The hungry organism eating ravenously is perhaps
disposing of a problem, but only in a trivial sense. In the
true "problem situation" the organism has no behavior
immediately available which will reduce the deprivation or
provide escape from aversive stimulation. This condition may
be expressed more generally. We need not specify the
deprivation or aversive condition if we can demonstrate that a
response exists in strength which cannot be emitted.
Discriminative stimulation may be needed to determine the
form or direction of the response (the golfer cannot shoot for
the green until he finds the green); or the response may
require external support or instrumentation which is lacking
(the golfer cannot shoot for the green until he finds the ball).
We may demonstrate the strength of the response in several
ways but usually by showing that it occurs as soon as the
occasion is suitable.
A locked drawer presents a problem if behavior requiring an
open drawer is strong and if the individual does not have the
key or other means of opening it. The strength of the
behavior is inferred from the presence of responses which
have previously opened the drawer

THINKING

247

or from the appearance of the behavior as soon as the
drawer has been opened. We can say that a stalled car
presents a problem if no behavior which succeeds in starting
it is immediately available and if behavior which has
previously succeeded in starting it is strong or if we have
other evidence that behavior which depends upon a started
car is strong. Interlocked wire rings are a problem if the
behavior of demonstrating them apart is strong and no
available response makes this possible. A murder mystery
presents a problem if we are strongly inclined to name the
murderer—to show that one name fits all statements in the
story consistently—and cannot do so. Buying wallpaper for
a room is a problem if we cannot say how many rolls we
need; it is another type of problem if we have measured the
room but have not converted our measurements into rolls of
paper. Mathematics is rich in problems, but the motivation
of the mathematician is often obscure. The deprivation or
aversive stimulation responsible for the strength of writing a
formula which always generates a prime number or of
proving that a given formula never fails to generate a prime
number is by no means clear.
In any case, the solution to a problem is simply a response
which alters the situation so that the strong response can be
emitted. Finding the key to the locked drawer, putting
gasoline into the car, twisting the wire rings in a certain
way, emitting a name which fits all the statements in the
murder mystery, and writing a formula which always
generates a prime number are solutions in this sense. Once
the solution has occurred, the problem vanishes simply
because the essential condition has been eliminated. (The
same problem is not likely to recur since the situation will
no longer be novel Henceforth, the response which
appeared as a solution will occur because it has been
reinforced under similar circumstances.)
Simply emitting a solution, however, is not solving a
problem. We are concerned here with the process of
"finding the solution." Problem-solving may be defined as
any behavior which, through the manipulation of variables,
makes the appearance of a solution more probable. This
definition seems to embrace the activities most commonly
described as problem-solving, and it permits a fairly
rigorous analysis of procedures or techniques. We may
solve the problems of

248

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

other people in this way, but we shall limit the discussion
here to the case in which the individual solves his own
problems.
The appearance of a solution does not guarantee that
problem-solving has taken place. An accidental change in
the environment often brings about a similar result—the key
may be found or the car suddenly respond to the starter. A
more subtle example, which has already been mentioned, is
Descartes's explanation of the behavior of the living
organism. The problem arose from a strong disposition to
emit explanatory remarks concerning the operation of the
living body. We must assume the strength of such behavior
even though at this late date we cannot account for it. The
explanation was a metaphor; a response based upon certain
fountain figures which were constructed to resemble living
organisms was simply extended through stimulus induction to
the living organism itself. We need not suppose that at the
moment this occurred, Descartes was engaged in solving the
problem in any active sense. The availability of the
information about the fountain figures may have been
wholly accidental. We need not, therefore, treat any
particular part of Descartes's behavior as problem-solving. It
was simply "hitting upon a solution."
For the same reason, so-called trial-and-error learning is
not problem-solving. The state of deprivation or aversive
stimulation required by a problem implies the high
probability of many responses. Some of these may be
emitted because the situation resembles other situations in
which they have been reinforced. It is possible that one of
these will be a solution—that it will solve the problem by
disposing of the essential condition. But this requires no
special treatment. Another kind of behavior likely to be
observed is random exploration. In the presence of a
problem the organism is simply active, Here again the
solution may follow by accident.
An example of problem-solving in the sense of finding a
solution appears in connection with trial-and-error learning
when the organism "learns how to try." It emits responses in
great numbers because of previous success and perhaps
according to certain features of the problem. Suppose we
challenge an individual to identify a word selected from a
list. Our challenge provides aversive stimulation, and

THINKING

249

our statement that we have chosen a word from a particular
list provides a discriminative stimulus increasing the
probability of a corresponding set of responses. The
individual's only recourse is to emit words on the list until
he hits upon the effective response. He may have discovered
ways of ordering his behavior, however, to avoid repetition,
to avoid omissions, and so on. He may progress rapidly
toward a solution if we reinforce him with descriptive
categories. He may then run through the alphabet for the
initial letter ("Is it a word beginning with . . .?"), then for the
second letter, and so on. A formal prompt will soon be
generated which will strengthen responses having a
reasonable chance of success. Or he may guess thematic or
grammatical categories—animal or vegetable, noun or verb,
and so on. The approach to the solution may be very skillful
when profitable categories have once been reinforced. But in
spite of the fact that one learns to use such a technique and
in spite of the apparent direction of the process, the behavior
is scarcely more than a trial-and-error performance. We can
account for the emergence of each trial response in terms of
the current occasion and the past history of the individual.
There is a minimum of "self-determination." One way to
encourage the emission of a response which may prove to be
a solution is to manipulate stimuli. A simple example is a
survey of the problem situation. This is often the effect of
random exploratory behavior and is therefore grouped
loosely with trial-and-error learning. But the effect is not to
emit a response which will prove to be a solution but to hit
upon stimuli which may control such a response. Improving
or amplifying available stimulation is especially effective;
we increase the chances of a solution when we look a
problem over carefully, when we get all the facts, or when
we point up relevant stimuli by stating a problem in its
clearest terms. A further step is to arrange or rearrange
stimuli. In the game of anagrams, for example, the problem
is to compose words from a miscellaneous assortment of
letters; the solution is simply spelling out an acceptable
word. It is helpful to rearrange the available letters since
some arrangements may resemble parts of words in the
individual's repertoire and hence serve as formal prompts.
The experienced anagram player learns to group letters
efficiently, especially in

250

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

certain subgroups which enable him to make profitable larger
groups, He learns to put "q" and "u" together, to try various
combinations of "sl," "sh," "sp," "th," and so on.
The logical syllogism is a way of arranging stimuli. The
logician possesses a verbal repertoire in which certain
conclusions are likely to be made upon the statement of
certain premises, but a particular problem may not present
itself in the required order. Solving the problem consists of
arranging the materials in syllogistic form. If the solution is
obtained wholly by applying a formula (Barbara
celarent . . .), the arrangement does not merely facilitate a
response but actually determines it, and the process is not
problem-solving as here defined. But there are less
mechanical cases in which the arrangement is made
primarily to encourage the appearance of a response which
has other sources of strength. In the same way the
mathematician is trained to transpose, factor, clear fractions,
and so on, until an expression appears in a form which
suggests a solution. Much of this may be relatively
mechanical, but in true problem-solving the procedures are
used to encourage the appearance of a novel response which
has other sources of strength.
Scientific knowledge often advances as the result of the
arrangement of stimuli. The Linnaean classification of species
was an arrangement of data which led, among other results,
to Darwin's solution of the problem of the origin of species.
Mendelyeev's table of the elements was an arrangement of
the data of chemistry which necessarily preceded modern
atomic theory. The marshalling of relevant information is
now so obvious a step in the solution of any problem that it
is a matter of routine where problems are to be solved by
groups and where the different functions of problem-solving
are delegated to different people. The "fact researcher" is a
familiar figure in the organized problem-solving of science
and industry.
Another technique of problem-solving consists essentially
of the self-probe. Tentative solutions, perhaps assembled for
this purpose, are systematically reviewed. There are also
certain practices which are not to be overlooked even
though they are not directed toward specific solutions and
hence are not ordinarily included in problem-solving. An
example is a certain type of self-probe which is so general

THINKING

251

that it must be used repetitively in the manner of the verbal
summator. Repetition is, of course, helpful in increasing the
effect of more specific techniques, as when we repeatedly
survey relevant material or restate a problem again and again.
But something like a formal probe which has no specific
reference to a given solution appears to be exemplified by
people who can "think better" in a noisy or otherwise
apparently distracting environment. Features of the noisy
background appear to operate like speech patterns of the
verbal summator to contribute strength to solutions. Visual
materials in the form of ink blots, "doodlings," or the
ambiguous stimulation of a crystal ball contribute to some
kinds of solutions.
The person who is skilled in "how to think" often
manipulates his levels of deprivation. He may know how to
generate interests relevant to a problem. He may generate an
adequate energy level by arranging a satisfactory program of
sleep or rest. He may arrange aversive schedules which keep
his behavior at an efficient pace. He may follow a rigid
routine to achieve the same result. Solving a problem may
also be facilitated by eliminating responses which conflict
with the solution. The techniques for doing this do not, of
course, depend upon a particular solution. In recalling a
name, for example, a wrong name may seem to stand in the
way of the right one. Here the response to be controlled, the
intruding response, can be identified, and any of the devices
employed in weakening behavior described in Chapter XV
may be used.
The "difficulty" of a problem is the availability of the
response which constitutes the solution. We may not need to
increase the strength very much. This is the case when the
problem closely resembles an earlier one: the wire ring
puzzle is like one which has previously been solved, the
murder mystery uses a standard plot, and the scientific
problem parallels a problem in another field. As the
similarity with earlier instances increases, and with it the
availability of an adequate response, a point is reached at
which it is idle to speak of problem-solving at all. At the
other extreme there may be little or nothing in the present
situation which strengthens appropriate responses, and in
this case the individual must industriously manipulate the
variables of which his behavior is a function. If no

252

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

behavior at all is available, no matter what is done by way of
changing the variables, the problem is insoluble so far as he is
concerned.
"HAVING AN IDEA"
The result of solving a problem is the appearance of a
solution in the form of a response. The response alters the
situation so that the problem disappears. The relation between
the preliminary behavior and the appearance of the solution is
simply the relation between the manipulation of variables and
the emission of a response. Until the functional relations in
behavior had been analyzed, this could not be clearly
understood; and meanwhile a great many fictional processes
were invented. Conspicuous examples are the "thought
processes" called thinking and reasoning. A functional
analysis removes much of the mystery which surrounds these
terms. We need not ask, for example, "where a solution
comes from." A solution is a response which exists in some
strength in the repertoire of the individual, if the problem is
soluble by him. The appearance of the response in his
behavior is no more surprising than the appearance of any
response in the behavior of any organism. It is either
meaningless or idle to ask where the response resides until it
summons strength enough to spring out into the open. We
may also easily represent the activities by virtue of which
the thinker gets an idea—at least so long as the behavior is
overt. Special problems undoubtedly arise when it is not, but
they are not peculiar to the analysis of thinking.
Instances have been described in which a mathematician
abandons a problem after working on it for a long time, only to
have the solution "pop into his head" quite unexpectedly at a
later date. It is tempting to suppose that he has continued to
work on the problem "unconsciously" and that his solution
follows immediately upon some successful manipulation of
variables. But variables will change automatically during a
period of time. Variables which have interfered with a
solution may grow weak, and supporting variables may turn
up. We need not, therefore, suppose that any problem-solving
occurred after overt work on the problem was dropped. The
fact that the solution comes as a surprise to the individual
himself does not alter this conclusion. We shall see in
Chapter XVIII that genuine

THINKING

253

problem-solving may well take place when the individual
himself cannot observe it, but many instances of "unconscious
thought" can be accounted for simply as changes leading to a
solution which ensue with the passage of time.
It is not only in problem-solving that one "suddenly has an
idea" in the sense of emitting a response. In a metaphor, for
example, we have seen that a response is evoked by a stimulus
which shares only certain tenuous properties with the
stimulus originally in control. One suddenly "sees the
similarity" between repeated misfortune and the repeated
assault of waves against a rocky coast in the sense that a
response appropriate to the one is now made to the other. This
may occur with or without external aid. The metaphor may
"come to us" as we are speaking or writing, or we may "see the
point" when someone else emits the transferred response. On
a broader scale we "get new ideas from a book" in the sense
that we acquire many responses to a situation which we did not
possess before reading it. In this sense the book may "clear up
our thinking" about a given situation.
We often manipulate materials in the world about us to
generate "new ideas" when no well-defined problem is present.
A child of six, playing with a badminton bird and a white
rubber ball, put the ball in the feathered end of the bird. This
"gave her an idea." She began to lick the ball as if the whole
assemblage were an ice cream cone and immediately spoke
of it as such. There is nothing mysterious about this "act of
thought." The manipulative and verbal responses appropriate
to an ice cream cone were brought out by similar geometrical
features of the bird and ball. There was no significant problem;
an idle manipulation of nature simply generated a novel
pattern which, through stimulus induction, evoked a response
characteristically in some strength in a child of six.
The artist may manipulate a medium simply to generate
ideas in much the same way. It is true that he may mix or
place colors on a palette or canvas to solve a specific problem
—for example, that of producing a likeness. The trained artist
has already solved some of the subsidiary problems and
possesses a repertoire, similar to those discussed in Chapter
VII, which generates patterns resembling the properties of the
object to be copied. There may also be certain novel

254

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

features in the object which call for the preliminary
behavior which we should here designate as problemsolving. The artistic exploration of a medium may, however,
proceed in the absence of any explicit problem. This
behavior is most obvious when the task is delegated to
mechanical devices. The artist may generate novel
geometrical designs by following an arbitrary formula, such
as that of "dynamic symmetry," or by "doodling." In the
same way the writer may generate novel plots by
manipulating stock characters in stock situations, just as the
composer may generate new melodies or rhythms by
changing the settings on a mechanical device or by
manipulating symbols on paper or by allowing his cat to
walk across the keyboard. All this may be done, not to solve
a specific problem, but to enlarge an artistic repertoire. The
general problem is simply to come up with something new.
ORIGINALITY IN IDEAS
We saw that self-control rests ultimately with the
environmental variables which generate controlling
behavior and, therefore, originates outside the organism.
There is a parallel issue in the field of ideas. Is an idea ever
original?
We do not call original that response which is obviously
imitative or controlled by explicit verbal stimuli, as in
following spoken or written instructions. We are not wholly
inclined to call a response original, even though it has never
been made before, when it is the result of some established
procedure of manipulating variables—as in routine
mathematical operations or the use of syllogistic formulae.
When a pattern of manipulation has never been applied to a
particular case before, the result is, in a sense, new. For
example, the individual learns lo count as the result of
explicit educational reinforcement, but he may be original
in what he counts. The observation that a cube has six faces
must at one time have been an original idea.
We reserve the term "original" for those ideas which
result from manipulations of variables which have not
followed a rigid formula and in which the ideas have other
sources of strength. A given procedure in problem-solving
may never have been used in precisely

THINKING

255

the same way before or in connection with the same
material, and it does not lead to the conclusion by itself.
Some additional strength is supplied by stimulus induction
from similar situations. This induction, however, is also the
result of a particular personal history and of well-defined
behavioral processes. We may, therefore, acknowledge the
emergence of novel ideas, in the sense of responses never
made before under the same circumstances, without
implying any element of originality in the individuals who
"have" them.
Man is now in much better control of the world than were
his ancestors, and this suggests a progress in discovery and
invention in which there appears to be a strong element of
originality. But we could express this fact just as well by
saying that the environment is now in better control of man.
Reinforcing contingencies shape the behavior of the
individual, and novel contingencies generate novel forms of
behavior. Here, if anywhere, originality is to be found. As
time passes men react to more and more subtle features of
the world about them and in more and more effective ways.
The accumulation of behavior is made possible by the
growth of a social environment which forces modern man to
respond to differences which only very slowly gained
control of the behavior of his ancestors (Chapters XIX and
XXVIII). Educational agencies established by the group
provide for the transmission of the results of environmental
contingencies from one individual to another, and it becomes
possible for the individual to acquire effective behavior on a
vast scale.
We cannot rigorously account for the origin of important
ideas in the history of science because many relevant facts
have long since become unavailable. The question of
originality can be disposed of, however, by providing
plausible accounts of the way in which a given idea might
have occurred. The study of the history of science has made
this task somewhat more feasible than it once seemed, since
it has tended to minimize the contribution made by any one
man. It is much easier to account for Harvey's discovery that
the blood passes from the right to the left ventricle by way
of the lungs and not through the septum when we learn that
the view had already been proposed that some of the blood
passed this way. James Watt's invention of the steam engine
seems much less miraculous when we have

256

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

once learned about the earlier forms of the engine upon
which his contribution was based.
A formulation of creative thinking within the framework
of a natural science may be offensive to those who prize their
conception of the individual in control of the world about him
(Chapter XXIX), but the formulation may have compensating
advantages. So long as originality is identified with
spontaneity or an absence of lawfulness in behavior, it
appears to be a hopeless task to teach a man to be original or
to influence his process of thinking in any important way. The
present analysis should lead to an improvement in
educational practices. If our account of thinking is essentially
correct, there is no reason why we cannot teach a man how to
think. There is also no reason why we cannot greatly improve
methods of thinking to utilize the full potentialities of the
thinking organism—whether this is the individual or the
organized group or, indeed, the highly complex mechanical
device.

CHAPTER XVII

PRIVATE EVENTS
IN A NATURAL SCIENCE
THE WORLD WITHIN ONE’S SKIN
When we say that behavior is a function of the environment,
the term "environment" presumably means any event in the universe
capable of affecting the organism. But part of the universe is enclosed
within the organism's own skin. Some independent variables may,
therefore, be related to behavior in a unique way. The individual's
response to an inflamed tooth, for example, is unlike the response
which anyone else can make to that particular tooth, since no one else
can establish the same kind of contact with it. Events which take
place during emotional excitement or in states of deprivation are often
uniquely accessible for the same reason; in this sense our joys, sorrows,
loves, and hates are peculiarly our own. With respect to each
individual, in other words, a small part of the universe is private.
We need not suppose that events which take place within an
organism's skin have special properties for that reason. A private
event may be distinguished by its limited accessibility but not, so
far as we know, by any special structure or nature. We have no
reason to sup257

258

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

pose that the stimulating effect of an inflamed tooth is essentially
different from that of, say, a hot stove. The stove, however, is
capable of affecting more than one person in approximately the
same way. In studying behavior we may have to deal with the
stimulation from a tooth as an inference rather than as a directly
observable fact. But if some of the independent variables of which
behavior is a function are not directly accessible, what becomes of
a functional analysis? How are such variables to be treated?
These questions may not be of interest to all readers. The issue is
an ancient one, which has occupied the attention of philosophers
and others for more than two thousand years. It has never been
satisfactorily resolved, and perhaps the present inclination on the
part of educated laymen to avoid it represents simple extinction.
Fortunately, the issue is seldom crucial in the practical control of
human behavior. The reader whose interests are essentially
practical and who may now prefer to move on to later chapters
may do so without serious trouble. Nevertheless, the issue is
important and must sometime be faced. Modern science has
attempted to put forth an ordered and integrated conception of
nature. Some of its most distinguished men have concerned
themselves with the broad implications of science with respect to
the structure of the universe. The picture which emerges is almost
always dualistic. The scientist humbly admits that he is describing
only half the universe, and he defers to another world—a world of
mind or consciousness—for which another mode of inquiry is
assumed to be required. Such a point of view is by no means
inevitable, but it is part of the cultural heritage from which science
has emerged. It obviously stands in the way of a unified account of
nature. The contribution which a science of behavior can make in
suggesting an alternative point of view is perhaps one of its most
important achievements. No discussion of the implications of
science for an understanding of human behavior would be
complete without at least a brief review of this contribution.
VERBAL RESPONSES TO PRIVATE EVENTS
The verbal response "red" is established as a discriminative
operant by a community which reinforces the response when it is
made in the

PRIVATE EVENTS IN A NATURAL SCIENCE

259

presence of red stimuli and not otherwise. This can easily be done if
the community and the individual both have access to red stimuli. It
cannot be done if either the individual or the community is
colorblind. The latter case resembles that in which a verbal
response is based upon a private event, where, by definition,
common access by both parties is impossible. How does the
community present or withhold reinforcement appropriately in order
to bring such a response as "My tooth aches" under the control of
appropriate stimulation? It may easily establish the response "My
tooth is broken" because both the individual and the community
have access to the stimulus for "broken," but the community has no
comparable access to the stimulus eventually controlling "aches."
Nevertheless, verbal behavior of this sort is obviously set up.
The community may resort to public accompaniments of the
private event. For example, it may establish a verbal response to an
aching tooth by presenting or withholding reinforcement according
to a special condition of the tooth which almost certainly
accompanies the private event or according to violent collateral
responses such as holding the jaw or crying out. Thus we teach a
child to say "That itches" or "That tickles" because we observe
either public events which accompany such private stimulation
("the kinds of things which itch or tickle") or some such identifying
response as scratching or squirming. This method of circumventing
the privacy of the individual is not foolproof because the public
and private events may not be perfectly correlated.
There is another possibility. Verbal responses which are acquired
with respect to public events may be transferred to private events on
the basis of common properties. It has often been pointed out that
many subjective terms are metaphorical, at least in origin. The
language of emotion, for example, is almost wholly metaphorical;
its terms are borrowed from descriptions of public events in which
both the individual and the reinforcing community have access to
the same stimuli. Here again the community cannot guarantee an
accurate verbal repertoire because the response may be transferred
from public event to private event on the basis of irrelevant
properties.
The techniques which guarantee the reliability of a verbal report

260

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

cannot be brought to bear upon a private description. The science of
introspective psychology met this difficulty whenever it departed
from the study of responses to controllable stimuli. The psychologist
can, for example, manipulate the color, brightness, or saturation of a
spot of light in order to establish a sensitive verbal repertoire in his
subject with respect to these properties. Such an experimental
situation does not raise the problem of privacy at all. But
establishing a comparable repertoire to distinguish between various
"states of emotion," for example, is a task of a very different sort.
Unless the psychologist can manipulate the events reported during
emotion as he manipulates the properties of a patch of light, he
must resort to imperfect public accompaniments.
The layman also finds the lack of a reliable subjective vocabulary
inconvenient. Everyone mistrusts verbal responses which describe
private events. Variables are often operating which tend to weaken
the stimulus control of such descriptions, and the reinforcing
community is usually powerless to prevent the resulting distortion.
The individual who excuses himself from an unpleasant task by
pleading a headache cannot be successfully challenged, even though
the existence of the private event is doubtful. There is no effective
answer to the student who insists, after being corrected, that that was
what he "meant to say," but the existence of this private event is not
accepted with any confidence.
The individual himself also suffers from these limitations. The
environment, whether public or private, appears to remain
undistinguished until the organism is forced to make a distinction.
Anyone who has suddenly been required to make fine color
discriminations will usually agree that he now "sees" colors which
he had not previously "seen." It is hard to believe that we should
not distinguish between the primary colors unless there were some
reason for doing so, but we are conditioned to do this so early in our
history that our experience is probably not a safe guide. Experiments
in which organisms are raised in darkness tend to confirm the view
that discriminative behavior waits upon the contingencies which
force discriminations. Now, self-observation is also the product of
discriminative contingencies, and if a discrimination cannot be
forced by the com-

PRIVATE EVENTS IN A NATURAL SCIENCE

261

munity, it may never arise. Strangely enough, it is the community
which teaches the individual to "know himself."
Some contingencies involving inner stimulation do not, of course,
have to be arranged by a reinforcing community. In throwing a ball
we time a sequence of responses by the stimulation which our own
movements generate. Here the reinforcing contingencies are
determined by the mechanical and geometrical exigencies of
throwing a ball, and since a reinforcing community is not involved,
the question of accessibility to the behaving individual does not arise.
But "knowledge," as we saw in Chapter VIII, is particularly
identified with the verbal behavior which arises from social
reinforcement. Apparently, conceptual and abstract behavior are
impossible without such reinforcement. The kind of self-knowledge
represented by discriminative verbal behavior—the knowledge
which is "expressed" when we talk about our own behavior—is
strictly limited by the contingencies which the verbal community
can arrange. The deficiencies which generate public mistrust lead,
in the case of the individual himself, to simple ignorance. There
appears to be no way in which the individual may sharpen the
reference of his own verbal repertoire in this respect. This is
particularly unfortunate because he probably has many reasons for
distorting his own report to himself (Chapter XVIII).
VARIETIES OF PRIVATE STIMULATION
It is customary to distinguish between two types of internal
stimulation. Interoceptive stimuli arise mainly in the digestive,
respiratory, and circulatory systems. A full or inflamed stomach, a
stomach contracting in hunger, a gallstone distending the bile duct,
the contractions or relaxations of small blood vessels in blushing
and blanching, and a pounding heart all generate interoceptive
stimuli. These are the principal stimuli to which one reacts in
"feeling an emotion." Proprioceptive stimuli, on the other hand, are
generated by the position and movement of the body in space and
by the position and movement of parts of the body with respect to
other parts. We usually respond to stimuli of this sort in
combination with exteroceptive stimulation from the surrounding
environment, and we do not always

262

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

correctly identify the source of stimulation. Thus when we run our
hand over a surface and judge it to be sticky, gummy, or slippery,
our response is in part to the resistance encountered in moving our
hand, even though we appear to be talking about the surface as a
public event. The important point here, however, is not the locus of
stimulation but the degree of accessibility to the community.
An important verbal repertoire describes one's own behavior. It
is generated by a community which insists upon answers to such
questions as "What did you say?" "What are you doing?" "What
are you going to do?" or "Why are you doing that?" Although
these questions are usually practical ones, the theoretical
implications are equally important. Since the individual may often
observe his own behavior as a public event, the public-private
distinction does not always arise. In that case the accuracy of the
self-descriptive repertoire may be adequate. If a man says, "I went
home at three o'clock," there are ways in which this may be
checked and his behavior reinforced to insure future accuracy. But
part of the stimulation which the individual receives from his own
behavior is different from that available to the community.
A description of behavior which has not been executed appears
to depend upon private events only. For example, a man may say,
"I was on the point of going home at three o'clock," though he did
not go. Here the controlling stimuli are not only private, they
appear to have no public accompaniments. Such responses as "I'm
strongly inclined to go home" or "I shall go home in half an hour"
also describe states of affairs which appear to be accessible only to
the speaker. How can the verbal community establish responses of
this sort?
A possible explanation is that the terms are established as part of
a repertoire when the individual is behaving publicly. Private
stimuli, generated in addition to the public manifestations, then
gain the necessary degree of control. Later when these private
stimuli occur alone, the individual may respond to them. "I was on
the point of going home" may be regarded as the equivalent of "I
observed events in myself which characteristically precede or
accompany my going home." What these events are, such an
explanation does not say.

PRIVATE EVENTS IN A NATURAL SCIENCE

263

Comparable expressions may describe the momentary probability
of behavior as well as its particular form.
Another possibility is that when an individual appears to describe
unemitted behavior, he is actually describing a history of variables
which would enable an independent observer to describe the
behavior in the same way if a knowledge of the variables were
available to him. The question, "Why did you do that?" is often
important to the community, which establishes a repertoire of
responses based upon the external events of which behavior is a
function, as well as upon the functional relation itself. We are
usually able to report that a particular stimulating situation, a
special contingency of reinforcement, a condition of deprivation, or
some emotional circumstance is responsible for our own behavior:
"I often drop in on X because he serves excellent drinks," "I
spanked the brat because he had been thoroughly annoying," "I
generally take the early train because it is less crowded," and so
on. It is possible that the same data may be used to predict our own
future behavior. The statement, "I shall probably go abroad next
summer," may be due to variables of a wholly public' nature which
make it equivalent to the statement, "Circumstances have arisen
which make it highly probable that I shall go abroad." This is not a
description of behavior-to-be-emitted but of the conditions of
which that behavior is a function. The individual himself is, of
course, often in an advantageous position for observing his own
history.
One important sort of stimulus to which the individual may
possibly be responding when he describes unemitted behavior has
no parallel among other forms of private stimulation. It arises
from the fact that the behavior may actually occur but on such a
reduced scale that it cannot be observed by others—at least
without instrumentation. This is often expressed by saying that the
behavior is "covert." Sometimes it is said that the reduced form is
merely the beginning of the overt form—that the private event is
incipient or inchoate behavior. A verbal repertoire which has been
established with respect to the overt case might be extended to
covert behavior because of similar self-stimulation. The organism
is generating the same effective stimuli, albeit on a much smaller
scale.

264

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

The appeal to covert or incipient behavior is easily misused. If
the statement, "I was on the point of going home," is a response to
stimuli generated by a covert or incipient response of actually
going home, how may the response of going home be executed
covertly? In such a case, one of the other interpretations may well
be preferred. Verbal behavior, however, can occur at the covert
level because it does not require the presence of a particular
physical environment for its execution. Moreover, it may remain
effective at the covert level because the speaker himself is also a
listener and his verbal behavior may have private consequences.
The covert form continues to be reinforced, even though it has been
reduced in magnitude to the point at which it has no appreciable
effect on the environment. Most people observe themselves talking
privately. A characteristic report begins "I said to myself . . ."
where the stimuli which control the response "I said" are
presumably similar, except in magnitude, to those which in part
control the response, "I said to him . . ."
RESPONSES TO ONE'S OWN
DISCRIMINATIVE BEHAVIOR
When a man says, "There is a rainbow in the sky" or "The clock
is striking twelve," we can give a reasonable interpretation of his
behavior in terms of a stimulating situation and certain
characteristic conditioning procedures with which the community
has set up verbal responses. But if he says, "I see a rainbow in the
sky" or "I hear the clock striking twelve," additional terms have to
be taken into account. Their importance is easily demonstrated.
The group usually benefits when an individual responds verbally to
events with which he alone is in contact. In so doing, he broadens
the environment of those who hear him. But it is also important
that he report the conditions under which he is responding. In so
doing he reveals, so to speak, the "source of his information." The
response, "I see a rainbow in the sky," is of a different order of
importance from the response, "They say there is a rainbow in the
sky." Other reasons why the group may be interested in the nature
of the behavior of the speaker are suggested by such familiar
questions as "Do you see that

PRIVATE EVENTS IN A NATURAL SCIENCE

265

man over by the window?" "Can you hear me?" or "Do you smell
smoke?"
When the community conditions the individual to say, "I see . . ."
"I hear . . ." "I smell . . ." and so on, it must have some evidence of
discriminative behavior. In certain cases it may rely upon the
inevitability of a response to a conspicuous stimulus—"You see, it's
raining after all." At other times it may rely upon the orientation of
receptors: we tell a child that he is seeing a dog when we are sure
that his eyes are oriented toward the dog, or that he is feeling the
texture of a piece of cloth when we run his fingers over the cloth.
But we cannot always or safely count upon evidence that a
stimulus is merely being received. We have no comparable
evidence for faint odors or tastes, or for visual or auditory stimuli
to which receptors need not be especially oriented. How, for
example, can the community teach the individual to report
correctly that he is seeing the color of a piece of cloth or hearing
the oboe in a full orchestra? Here there must be clear evidence that
a discriminative reaction is being made. "Do you see that bird in
the bush?" "Yes." "What kind is it?" Only when collateral
information is correctly given does the community appropriately
reinforce the response "Yes."
A verbal repertoire which describes the discriminative behavior
of the individual appears, then, to be established on external
evidence that a discriminative response is taking place, rather than
that stimuli are present or received. When the individual comes to
describe his own discriminative behavior, presumably he does so, at
least initially, on comparable evidence. He observes himself as he
executes some identifying response. The private events correlated
with the public events used by the community are also the result of
discriminative behavior, not simple stimulation. The response, "I
see a rainbow," is, therefore, not equivalent to "There is a
rainbow." If it were, a single discriminative stimulus—the rainbow
—would account for both forms, but "I see a rainbow" is a
description of the response of seeing a rainbow. When the rainbow
is actually present, the distinction may be of little moment.
But the rainbow is not always present. Perhaps the most difficult
problem in the analysis of behavior is raised by responses
beginning

266

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

"I see . . .," "I hear . . .," and so on, when the customary stimuli are
lacking. Here an accurate formulation of responses which describe
one's own discriminative behavior is essential. We may approach
this problem by surveying the circumstances under which a man
"sees something." Presumably these will also be the circumstances
under which he says, "I see something." (Parallel cases for "I
hear . . .," "I taste . . .," need not be explicitly discussed.) No
special problem is raised when an appropriate stimulus is present.
We are also prepared for instances in which the stimulus is not the
customary one but has enough in common with it to control the
response. The process of abstraction also provides examples in
which the complete stimulus is not available but of which an
adequate account may nevertheless be given. When there are no
stimuli present which resemble the usual stimuli, a response
beginning "I see . . ." must be explained in terms of conditioning.
There are two major possibilities corresponding to the distinction
between respondent and operant conditioning.
CONDITIONED SEEING
A man may see or hear "stimuli which are not present" on the
pattern of the conditioned reflex: he may see X, not only when X is
present, but when any stimulus which has frequently accompanied
X is present. The dinner bell not only makes our mouth water, it
makes us see food. In the Pavlovian formula we simply substitute
"seeing food" for '"salivating." Originally both of these responses
were made to food, but through a process of conditioning they are
eventually made in response to the bell. When a man reports that
the dinner bell makes him see food (he is more likely to say that it
"reminds him of food" or "makes him think of food"), we may
suppose that he is reporting a response which is similar to the
response made in the presence of food. It is only an unfortunate
tradition, apparently due to the Greeks, which leads us to ask what
he is seeing in such a case. When he reports that the bell makes his
mouth water, we do not feel compelled to ask what he is salivating
to. A stimulus function has been assumed by a different stimulus,
which may control seeing food as well as salivating.

PRIVATE EVENTS IN A NATURAL SCIENCE

267

The effect of a conditioned stimulus in evoking the response of
seeing something helps to explain the character of responses to
stimuli which are present but which are at variance with "what is
seen." Conditioned seeing may combine with responses to
unconditioned stimuli. We see familiar objects more readily and
easily than unfamiliar objects; the stimuli actually present upon a
given occasion may be effective both as conditioned and
unconditioned stimuli at the same time. In catching only a passing
glimpse of a bird, we see it distinctly if it is a familiar bird and
indistinctly if it is not. The fragmentary stimuli have served to
evoke conditioned seeing, which combines with the unconditioned
seeing of the immediate stimulus. A poetic description of the sound
of the sea is especially effective if one reads it while listening to
the sea, for the verbal and nonverbal stimuli combine to produce
an especially strong response. In a pack of playing cards, the shape
of a heart or diamond is correlated with the color red. While
playing cards one is especially likely to see a heart or diamond,
rather than a spade or club, if one catches a glimpse of red. The
verbal stimulus "heart" is likely to evoke seeing red as well as
seeing a heart. It has been shown experimentally that if one who is
familiar with playing cards is very briefly shown a heart printed in
black ink, the heart is sometimes seen as red or as a mixture of red
and black, perhaps reported as purple. If the card remains in view
for a longer time, the current stimulus will completely mask the
conditioned response of seeing red, but a brief exposure of
appropriate duration leads to a fusion of conditioned and
unconditioned responses.
In more general terms, conditioned seeing explains why one
tends to see the world according to one's previous history. Certain
properties of the world are responded to so commonly that "laws
of perception" have been drawn up to describe the behavior thus
conditioned. For example, we generally see completed circles,
squares, and other figures. An incomplete figure presented under
deficient or ambiguous circumstances may evoke seeing a
completed figure as a conditioned response. For example, a ring
with a small segment missing when very briefly exposed may be
seen as a completed ring. Seeing a completed ring would
presumably not be inevitable in an

268

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

individual whose daily life was concerned with handling
incompleted rings—as might be the case in manufacturing certain
types of piston rings, for example. Some of the so-called
synesthesias are also examples of a fusion of conditioned and
unconditioned seeing. In a common example numbers are seen as
colored. Something of this sort could arise if a child first learned to
respond to numbers in a book in which geometric form and color
were systematically paired. The geometric form would then lead to
the conditioned response of seeing the corresponding color. The
spoken stimulus "Seven" would lead to two conditioned responses:
seeing the form 7 and seeing the associated color.
All those circumstances under which a mature individual will
exhibit the response of seeing something may be arranged in a
continuum. At one extreme the momentary stimulation is optimal.
If, for example, the individual is listening to a stormy sea, the
sound is primarily in control. "Hearing the sea" is not a wholly
unconditioned response, however, since it depends upon previous
experience. If we now reduce the momentary stimulation by
transporting our individual farther and farther from the sea, we
increase the role played by conditioned stimuli. A faint distant roar
is heard "as the sound of the sea" only because of a particular
history. Any sound similar to that of the sea may have this effect—
for example, that of traffic in the street. If we now begin to
introduce conditioned stimuli of a clearly different form—for
example, nonauditory stimuli—we may be able to show the fusion
of two distinct effects. If our subject examines a picture of heavy
surf, current auditory stimuli resembling the sound of surf will
make the total response of seeing and hearing the sea more
powerful. At the other extreme of our continuum is the purely
conditioned response—hearing appropriate sounds in a quiet room
while observing a painting of the sea. If such an effect occurs, it
must be due to conditioning, since what is heard is an auditory
stimulus but what is present is visual.
There are, of course, great differences in the extent to which
individuals exhibit conditioned seeing, hearing, and so on. Francis
Galton first surveyed this form of human behavior in the
nineteenth century. Some of his subjects showed an exceptional
ability to see things

PRIVATE EVENTS IN A NATURAL SCIENCE

269

which he described to them, while others found it almost
impossible. Some subjects showed special abilities in certain fields
only. Congenital defects of sensory equipment are sometimes
responsible —as, for example, in the color-blind or tone-deaf.
Other individual differences may be traced to the histories of the
individuals. One difference depends upon the extent to which the
requisite conditioning has taken place. In a world in which visual
stimuli are extremely important one would expect many
conditioned responses of this sort to be set up. It is not surprising
to find that the composer is especially likely to be able to "hear
music which is not present," while the artist is especially able to
"see forms which are not present," and so on. It is possible, of
course, that a man may become an artist or musician because of
special abilities of this sort, but the obvious differences in personal
history are almost certainly relevant. Another difference depends
upon whether the individual is able to respond to his conditioned
discriminative responses, and this in turn depends upon whether
the community has forced verbal responses to them. A society
which breeds introspective people would probably have more data
of this sort to account for, not because more private seeing occurs,
but because more of it comes into the public domain through selfdescription. In a group which seldom insists upon such behavior,
the problem might never arise at all.
When an individual reports that he sees an object which is
actually before him, we can distinguish between his response to the
object and his response to his response. The individual himself
makes the same distinction. It is usually possible for him to say
that there is or is not a rainbow present when he reports that he
sees one and that this is the variable of which his behavior is
primarily a function. When the stimulus only partially resembles
the usual stimulus, the subject may report that it "reminds him" of
it. When the "stimulus seen" is actually lacking but the subject
cannot report that fact, we say that he is suffering from a
hallucination. He sees something and reports that he sees
something, and from these events alone he may assert that
something is there. When the current situation is further clarified,
he may revise this report and conclude that he "only thought" he
saw it. On the other hand he may refuse to make a

270

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

response to the current situation which is incompatible with his
conditioned response and may insist that what he sees is "really
there." There are certain areas in which a collateral check on the
presence or absence of an appropriate stimulus is not easily made.
In such a case, we are much less likely to insist upon the
distinction. Since we do not ordinarily confirm the presence or
absence of bitter substances in the mouth, we are not likely to argue
that the response, "My mouth tastes bitter," is hallucinatory.
The practical importance of conditioned seeing. A private
event is not wholly without practical importance. Stimuli which
generate conditioned seeing are often reinforcing because they do
so, and they extend the range of reinforcing stimuli available in the
control of human behavior. The practical task of generating
conditioned stimuli of special effectiveness is an important one, as
the artist, writer, and composer know. If it is possible to reinforce a
man with the "beauties of nature," it is usually possible to reinforce
him also with conditioned stimuli which evoke responses of seeing
the beauties of nature. It is the function of the "word picture" to
generate such conditioned seeing. By fusing conditioned and
unconditioned seeing the artist makes the observer see the same
thing in another way. Nostalgic music is effective if it "reminds
one" of happier days, a return to which would also be reinforcing.
The extent to which this process is used in art varies from period to
period but is always considerable. It is not to be identified with
realism or naturalism since the responses appropriate to the effect
of pure design are also largely dependent upon experience. We
shall return later to other practical applications of conditioned
seeing, hearing, and so on. In evaluating the effect of a given
culture it is important to note the extent to which conditioned
responses of this sort are set up and the extent to which
discriminative responses of self-knowledge are established with
respect to them.
OPERANT SEEING
There are many ways of showing that the discriminative operant
"seeing X" is strong. One kind of evidence is the strength of
precurrent behavior which makes seeing X possible. This may be
nothing

PRIVATE EVENTS IN A NATURAL SCIENCE

271

more than the behavior of looking at X, which the individual may
engage in at every opportunity or for long periods of time. Another
sort of precurrent behavior is looking for X—looking about in ways
which in the past have led to seeing X. Suppose we strongly reinforce
a person when he finds a four-leaf clover. The increased strength of
"seeing a four-leaf clover" will be evident in many ways. The
person will be more inclined to look at four-leaf clovers than before. He
will look in places where he has found four-leaf clovers. Stimuli which
resemble four-leaf clovers will evoke an immediate response. Under
slightly ambiguous circumstances he will mistakenly reach for a threeleaf clover. If our reinforcement is effective enough, he may even see
four-leaf clovers in ambiguous patterns in textiles, wallpaper, and so on.
He may also "see four-leaf clovers" when there is no similar visual
stimulation—for example, when his eyes are closed or when he is in a
dark room. If he has acquired an adequate vocabulary for selfdescription, he may report this by saying that four-leaf clovers "flash
into his mind" or that he "is thinking about" four-leaf clovers. We
frequently observe strong behavior without knowing much about
the circumstances which account for its strength. Consider, for
example, a person who is interested in dogs. One characteristic of
such a person is that the response "seeing dogs" is especially strong.
He looks at dogs at every opportunity and engages in behavior which
makes it possible to do so—for example, he visits kennels and dog
shows. He arranges stimuli which resemble dogs—he hangs pictures of
dogs on his walls, puts statues of dogs on his desk, and buys books
containing pictures of dogs. If he is an artist, photographer, or
sculptor, he may create similar pictures or statues himself. But the
presence of a dog or of a reasonable facsimile is not essential.
Conditioned stimuli which have accompanied dogs—leashes, feeding
equipment, and so on—easily "remind him of dogs." Certain verbal
stimuli—for example, stories or descriptions of dogs—lead him to
"picture dogs to himself," and he may obtain or even compose such
stimuli. The same strength is manifested when he sees dogs while
looking at ink blots, cloud formations, or other ambiguous patterns, or
when he mistakes some indistinctly seen object for a dog. The
behavior of seeing dogs also takes place in the absence of any iden-

272

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

tifiable external support. He "thinks about dogs," daydreams of dogs,
and perhaps even dreams of dogs at night.
Unlike conditioned seeing in the respondent pattern, such behavior
is not elicited by current stimuli and does not depend upon the
previous pairing of stimuli. The primary controlling variables are
operant reinforcement and deprivation. When we make a man
hungry, we strengthen practical responses which have in the past
been reinforced with food. We also strengthen artistic or verbal
responses which produce pictures of food, or generate conditioned
stimuli which are effective because they have accompanied food—
the individual draws pictures of food or talks about delicious meals
he has eaten. At the same time we induce him to "think of food," to
daydream of food, or to dream of food. Similarly, it is characteristic
of men under strong sexual deprivation, not only that they indulge in
sexual behavior as soon as an occasion presents itself or concern
themselves with the production or enjoyment of sexual art or engage
in sexual self-stimulation, but that they also see sexual objects or
activities in the absence of relevant stimuli. That all these forms of
activity are traceable to a common variable is shown by eliminating
the deprivation, whereupon we eliminate all forms of the behavior.
A discriminative response which can be made when the appropriate
stimulus is absent has certain advantages. It does not require the
sometimes troublesome precurrent behavior which generates an
external stimulus, and it can occur when such behavior is
impossible— as when we daydream of a lost love or an opportunity
which is wholly out of the question. Also, the private response is not
punished by society, even though the overt form may be. There
are, however, certain disadvantages. Such behavior does not alter the
state of deprivation. The fantasies of the hungry or sexually deprived
man do not alter the situation in such a way as to reduce the
strength of the behavior through satiation. We often appeal to a
reduction in deprivation to account for the effectiveness of a
reinforcement, but, as we saw in Chapter V, the relation explains
only why such stimuli are currently reinforcing in a given species.
The reinforcing effect is carried by private as well as public stimuli.
To one who is interested in dogs, simply seeing dogs is automatically
reinforcing. The hungry

PRIVATE EVENTS IN A NATURAL SCIENCE

273

or sexually deprived man is reinforced by the appearance or presence
of relevant objects, as well as by seeing them when they are absent.
Such reinforcement is not dependent upon an actual reduction in the
state of deprivation.
Operant seeing at the private level may be reinforced in other
ways. The private response may produce discriminative stimuli which
prove useful in executing further behavior of either a private or public
nature. In the following problem, for example, behavior is usually
facilitated by private seeing. "Think of a cube, all six surfaces of
which are painted red. Divide the cube into twenty-seven equal
cubes by making two horizontal cuts and two sets of two vertical
cuts each. How many of the resulting cubes will have three faces
painted red, how many two, how many one, and how many none?" It
is possible to solve this without seeing the cubes in any sense-as
by saying to oneself, "A cube has eight corners. A corner is defined as
the intersection of three faces of the cube. There will therefore be
eight pieces with three painted faces. . . ." And so on. But the solution
is easier if one can actually see the twenty-seven small cubes and count
those of each kind. This is easiest in the presence of actual cubes,
of course, and even a sketchy drawing will provide useful support; but
many people solve the problem visually without visual stimulation.
Private problem-solving usually consists of a mixture of
discriminative and manipulative responses. In this example one may
see the larger cube, cut it covertly, separate the smaller cubes
covertly, see their faces, count them subvocally, and so on. In mental
arithmetic one multiplies, divides, transposes, and so on, seeing the
result in each case, until a solution is reached. Presumably much of this
covert behavior is similar in form to the overt manipulation of pencil
and paper; the rest is discriminative behavior in the form of seeing
numbers, letters, signs, and so on, which is similar to the behavior
which would result from overt manipulation.
There are great individual differences in the extent to which
private seeing is used. Few people can equal the performance of one
of Galton's correspondents who could multiply by visualizing the
appropriate section of a slide rule, setting it at the appropriate
position,

274

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

and reading off the answer. As in conditioned seeing, such differences
may be traced either to differences in the extent to which private
seeing has been established or to differences in the ability to describe
the resulting self-stimulation or use it as a basis for further behavior.
There are also differences in the kind of private event preferred.
In solving a chess problem, one may have an idea, in the sense of
Chapter XVI, in several ways. The solution may come as the overt
response of moving a piece. It may come in overt verbal form ("Move
the knight to bishop seven") or in the same form covertly. It may
also come as covert nonverbal behavior, although it is admittedly
hard to determine the dimensions of such a response. We commonly
say, "I said to myself, 'Move the knight,'" but we have no
comparable idiom of the form, "I moved the knight to myself." The
solution may also come in the form of a discriminative reaction: we
may suddenly see the knight in its new position.
Even when covert behavior is mainly verbal, other types of private
responding frequently occur. Some writers report that they first hear
sentences, which they then record just as they would record the
speech of another person. Others execute sentences subvocally in an
obviously muscular form. There are instances in which, particularly
in dreams, a writer first reads a poem or story, which he then
transcribes. The poet deals primarily in verbal behavior, but he may be
a "seer" who resorts to words only to describe what he has seen, just
as he would describe a public event.
Similar differences arise when there is some measure of external
stimulation. In the Verbal Summator experiment, for example, some
subjects, listening to faint speech patterns, hear the phonograph
saying something. Others find themselves saying something, in
which case they may also, of course, "hear" their own verbal
behavior. There is commonly no parallel in the nonverbal projective
tests. In the Rorschach Test, the effect of the ink blot is primarily to
supplement a visual discriminative response. What is revealed is the
strength of seeing X, not of saying "X." The verbal report is usually a
response to the discriminative visual response.
The verbal repertoire which describes private events may fail to
distinguish between these cases. If we ask someone to think of the

PRIVATE EVENTS IN A NATURAL SCIENCE

275

number seven and he reports that he has done so, he may be reporting a
discriminative response in which he has seen the form 7 or the word
"seven," or some spatial arrangement of seven spots, seven subdivisions
of a line, and so on. But the same report may describe the fact that he
has said "seven" to himself or has drawn the form 7 covertly. In this case
the report may also include the fact that he has heard himself saying
"seven" or has seen the result of the nonverbal response. It is possible
that more than one, or even all, of these activities may occur when
one "thinks of the number seven." The community does not insist upon
a distinction among them because a distinction is usually of little
importance. Usually the variables which strengthen the discriminative
response of seeing an object are also those which strengthen the covert
or overt responses which produce the object. If hearing X is strong,
saying X will probably be strong also, since saying X is a precurrent
response which makes hearing X possible. This is obvious but none
the less important. It is often reinforcing to hear oneself praised. A
simple expedient is, therefore, to praise oneself. Boasting is, so to speak,
reinforced by the praise which one hears. Under the same conditions of
motivation one may also demonstrate a high probability of hearing praise
—for example, one may simply listen closely when one is being praised,
or interpret an overheard flattering remark as applying to oneself, or
misinterpret a neutral remark as praise.
Private discriminative responses are also reinforced by their effect in
self-control. With the exception of physical restraint all the variables
which one may manipulate in self-control are available at the private
level (Chapter XV). One may generate an emotional response by
recounting an emotional event or by simply seeing or hearing it. One
may generate an aversive condition through a verbal description of
punishment or through seeing or hearing the punishment again.
TRADITIONAL TREATMENT
OF THE PROBLEM
We account for verbal behavior which describes the discriminative
response of seeing X in the following way. Such behavior is acquired
when the organism is not only in the presence of X but actually

276

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

making a discriminative response to X. A similar discriminative
response may come to occur in the absence of X as the result of
respondent or operant conditioning. The verbal response which
describes the discriminative response is not inevitable, but whenever
it occurs, the same variables may be assumed to be active. We have
not altered the inaccessibility of the private event by this treatment,
but we have succeeded in bringing the behavior which describes the
event under some sort of functional control.
This is not, of course, the traditional solution to the problem of
private seeing. It is usually held that one does not see the physical
world at all, but only a nonphysical copy of it called "experience."
When the physical organism is in contact with reality, the
experienced copy is called a "sensation," "sense datum," or
"percept"; when there is no contact, it is called an "image," "thought,"
or "idea." Sensations, images, and their congeries are characteristically
regarded as psychic or mental events, occurring in a special world
of "consciousness" where, although they occupy no space, they can
nevertheless often be seen. We cannot now say with any certainty
why this troublesome distinction was first made, but it may have
been an attempt to solve certain problems which are worth
reviewing.
There are often many ways in which a single event may stimulate
an organism. Rain is something we see outside our window or hear on
the roof or feel against our face. Which form of stimulation is rain? It
must have been difficult to suppose that any one discriminative
response could identify a physical event. Hence it may have been
tempting to say that it identified a transient but unitary sensation or
perception of the event. Eventually the least equivocal form—
stimulation through contact with the skin—became most closely
identified with reality. A form vaguely seen in a darkened room was
not "really there" until one could touch it. But this was not a wholly
satisfactory solution. Stimulation arising from contact may not
agree perfectly with that arising visually or audibly, and we may not
be willing to identify one form with reality to the exclusion of the
others. There still are psychologists, however, who argue for the
priority of one form of stimulation and, hence, insist upon a
distinction between experience and reality. They are surprised to find
that "things are not what they seem" and that a room which looks
square from a given angle

PRIVATE EVENTS IN A NATURAL SCIENCE

277

may be found upon tactual or visual exploration to be askew. This
difficulty offers no particular problem here. It is obvious that a single
event may stimulate an organism in many ways, depending upon the
construction of the organism and its capacity to be stimulated by
different forms of energy. We are much less inclined today to ask
which form of energy is the thing itself or correctly represents it.
Another problem which the distinction between physical and nonphysical worlds may have been an attempt to solve arises from the
fact that more than one kind of response may be made to stimulation
arising from a physical event. Rain is something you may run to
escape from, catch in your hands to drink, prepare crops to receive, or
call "rain." Which response is made to "rain in itself"? The solution
was to construct a passive comprehension of rain, which was
supposed to have nothing to do with practical responses. So far as
we are concerned here, the problem is disposed of by recognizing
that many verbal and nonverbal responses may come under the control
of a given form of stimulation. With the possible exception of the
abstract verbal response, no behavior need be singled out as
"knowing rain."
The process of abstraction raises another difficulty from which the
concept of experience may have provided escape. We saw in Chapter
VIII that the referent or meaning of the response "rain" could not be
identified by examining a single occasion upon which the response
was made. Certain properties of a class of stimuli control such a
response, and they can be revealed only by a systematic investigation
of many instances. Upon any given occasion, the response appears to
be relatively free of the exigencies of the physical world and to deal
with a single dimension abstracted from it. The fact that the process
of abstraction appears to generate a world composed of general
properties, rather than of particular events, has led, however, to
inconsistent interpretations. On the one hand the particular event
has been regarded as immediate experience, while the process of
abstraction has been said to construct a physical world which is
never directly experienced. On the other hand the single occasion has
been viewed as a momentary unanalyzed contact with reality, while
systematic knowledge of the world has been identified with
experience.
Still another difficulty which must have encouraged the distinction

278

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

between two worlds was the inadequacy of early physical science.
How could the individual make contact with a world which lay
well beyond his skin? It was some comfort to suppose that one
never knew more than one's own experience, which could be
conceived of as existing within one's body. And if one never sees
the real world but only an imaginal copy of it, then it is not
difficult to account for instances in which the something seen is
not there in the real world at all. We have only to assume that
experience is independent of reality. To say that one sees the
sensation of a thing when the thing itself is far away appears to
solve the problem of the location of what is seen. To say that one
sees an image of the thing when the thing itself is absent appears to
solve the problem of the existence of what is seen. But the
solutions are spurious. One still has to explain how the distant
thing can generate the sensation or how an image can occur when
the thing is not present. Modern physical science solved the first of
these problems by bridging the gap between the distant object and
the organism. A study of behavior solved the second by pointing to
variables which lead the organism to see X in the absence of X.
Objections to the traditional view. There is scarcely any need
to point out the disadvantages of terms which refer to supposed
non-physical events. Even if it were possible to define "sensation"
and "image" in dimensions acceptable in a natural science, they
would appear as intervening concepts comparable to "drive,"
"habit," "instinct," and so on, and would be subject to the criticism
of such concepts presented in Section II. As usual the fictional
explanation has offered unwarranted consolation in the face of
difficult problems. By suggesting a type of causal event the
practice has discouraged the search for useful variables. Contrary
to the usual view, the special contact between the individual and
the events which occur within his own body does not provide him
with "inside information" about the causes of his behavior.
Because of his preferred position with respect to his own history,
he may have special information about his readiness to respond,
about the relation of his behavior to controlling variables, and
about the history of these variables. Although

PRIVATE EVENTS IN A NATURAL SCIENCE

279

this information is sometimes erroneous and, as we shall see in
Chapter XVIII, may even be lacking, it is sometimes useful in a
science of behavior. But the private event is at best no more than a
link in a causal chain, and it is usually not even that. We may think
before we act in the sense that we may behave covertly before we
behave overtly, but our action is not an "expression" of the covert
response or the consequence of it. The two are attributable to the
same variables.
A recent book on abnormal behavior contains the sentence, "A
system of emancipated ideas temporarily seizes control of
behavior." The facts are as well described by saying, "A system of
responses is temporarily prepotent." In either case we have still to
ask, "Why?" Even though something which may properly be,
called an idea precedes the behavior in a causal chain, we must go
back farther than the idea to find the relevant variables. If the
individual himself reports, "I have had the idea for some time but
have only just recently acted upon it," he is describing a covert
response which preceded the overt. Since someone who reports
"having an idea" is likely to be someone who will execute the overt
form, we may find the report of an idea helpful. But the report does
not complete a functional account. As we saw in Chapter X, to say
that a man strikes another because he feels angry still leaves the
feeling of anger unexplained. When we have once identified the
relevant variables, we find the feeling of anger much less
important by way of explanation. Similarly, it has often been
argued that the conditioned reflex is inadequate because it omits
mention of a link traditionally described as the "association of
ideas." To report that a man salivates when he hears the dinner bell
may be to overlook the fact that the dinner bell first "makes him
think of dinner" and that he then salivates because he thinks of
dinner. But there is no evidence that thinking of dinner, as that
expression has been defined here, is more than a collateral effect of
the bell and the conditioning process. We cannot demonstrate that
thinking of dinner will lead to salivation regardless of any prior
event, since a man will not think of dinner in the absence of such
an event.
One is still free, of course, to assume that there are events of a

280

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

nonphysical nature accessible only to the experiencing organism
and therefore wholly private. Science does not always follow the
principle of Occam's razor, because the simplest explanation is in
the long run not always the most expedient. But our analysis of
verbal behavior which describes private events is not wholly a
matter of taste or preference. We cannot avoid the responsibility of
showing how a private event can ever come to be described by the
individual or, in the same sense, be known to him. Our survey of
the ways in which a community may impart a subjective
vocabulary did not reveal any means of setting up a discriminative
response to privacy as such. A world of experience which is by
definition available only to the individual, wholly without public
accompaniment, could never become the discriminative occasion
for self-description.
OTHER PROPOSED SOLUTIONS
Studying one's own private world. It is sometimes suggested
that the psychologist can avoid the problem of privacy by limiting
his study to his own private share of the universe. It is true that
psychologists sometimes use themselves as subjects successfully, but
only when they manipulate external variables precisely as they
would in studying the behavior of someone else. The scientist's
"observation" of a private event is a response to that event, or
perhaps even a response to a response to it. In order to carry out
the program of a functional analysis, he must have independent
information about the event. This means he must respond to it in
some other way. For a similar reason he cannot solve the problem
of private events in the behavior of others by asking them to
describe such events. It has often been proposed that an objective
psychology may substitute the verbal report of a private event for
the event itself. But a verbal report is a response of the organism; it
is part of the behavior which a science must analyze. The analysis
must include an independent treatment of the events of which the
report is a function. The report itself is only half the story.
The physiology of sensation. The solution which follows from a
functional analysis of behavior is to be distinguished from two
others

PRIVATE EVENTS IN A NATURAL SCIENCE

281

which are currently proposed within the framework of a natural
science. One of these is closely identified with the study of the
physiology of receptors in the nervous system, the other with a
logical or "operational" analysis of the data of sensation and
perception. Such concepts as "sensation" and "image" are designed
to carry the pattern of the environment into the organism as far as
possible and thus to bridge the gap between the knower and the
known. The task of bringing the world to the surface of the organism
is properly within the scope of physics. Beyond this point it is within
the field of psychophysiology. The modern counterpart of the study of
mental events in a world of consciousness is the study of the action
of receptors and of the afferent and central nervous systems. The
rainbow in the sky or some correlated pattern of energy is brought to
the outer surface of the eye, then to the retina, then to the optic tract,
and eventually to certain parts of the brain—preferably with as little
distortion as possible. This makes it more plausible to say that the
organism directly experiences the principal features of the rainbow. It
is even tempting to .suppose that at some stage (presumably the
last) the pattern in the brain is the sensation or image. But seeing is a
response to a stimulus rather than a mere camera-like registering. In
carrying the pattern of the rainbow into the organism, almost no
progress is made toward understanding the behavior of seeing the
rainbow. It is of little moment whether the individual sees the actual
rainbow or the sensation of a rainbow or some terminal neural
pattern in the brain. At some point he must see, and this is more
than recording a similar pattern. Apart from the mode of action of
receptors and other organs, the physiology of sensation is concerned
with the question of what is seen. The question may be a spurious
one arising from an idiom or figure of speech. If we say that the
rainbow (either as an objective event in the environment or as a
corresponding pattern within the organism) is not "what is seen" but
simply the commonest variable which controls the behavior of
seeing, we are much less likely to be surprised when the behavior
occurs as a function of other variables.
Operational definitions of sensation and image. Another
proposed solution to the problem of privacy argues that there are
public and

282

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

private events and that the latter have no place in science because
science requires agreement by the members of a community. Far
from avoiding the traditional distinction between mind and matter,
or between experience and reality, this view actually encourages it.
It assumes that there is, in fact, a subjective world, which it places
beyond the reach of science. On this assumption the only business
of a science of sensation is to examine the public events which
may be studied in lieu of the private.
The present analysis has a very different consequence. It
continues to deal with the private event, even if only as an
inference. It does not substitute the verbal report from which the
inference is made for the event itself. The verbal report is a
response to the private event and may be used as a source of
information about it. A critical analysis of the validity of this
practice is of first importance. But we may avoid the dubious
conclusion that, so far as science is concerned, the verbal report or
some other discriminative response is the sensation.
The private made public. One other way of attacking the
problem within the framework of a natural science is compatible
with the present analysis. The line between public and private is
not fixed. The boundary shifts with every discovery of a technique
for making private events public. Behavior which is of such small
magnitude that it is not ordinarily observed may be amplified.
Covert verbal behavior may be detected in slight movements of the
speech apparatus. Deaf-mutes who speak with their fingers behave
covertly with their fingers, and the movements may be suitably
amplified. There is no reason why covert behavior could not be
amplified so that the individual himself could make use of the
additional information—for example, in creative thinking. After
all, this is only what the individual does when he thinks publicly
by scratching notes on paper or by manipulating an artistic
medium. The problem of privacy may, therefore, eventually be
solved by technical advances. But we are still faced with events
which occur at the private level and which are important to the
organism without instrumental amplification. How the organism
reacts to these events will remain an important question, even
though the events may some day be made accessible to everyone

CHAPTER XVIII

THE SELF

What is meant by the "self" in self-control or self-knowledge?
When a man jams his hands into his pockets to keep himself from
biting his nails, who is controlling whom? When he discovers that
a sudden mood must be due to a glimpse of an unpleasant person,
who discovers whose mood to be due to whose visual response? Is
the self which works to facilitate the recall of a name the same as
the self which recalls it? When a thinker teases out an idea, is it the
teaser who also eventually has the idea?
The self is most commonly used as a hypothetical cause of
action. So long as external variables go unnoticed or are ignored,
their function is assigned to an originating agent within the
organism. If we cannot show what is responsible for a man's
behavior, we say that he himself is responsible for it. The
precursors of physical science once followed the same practice,
but the wind is no longer blown by Aeolus, nor is the rain cast
down by Jupiter Pluvius. Perhaps it is because the notion of
personification is so close to a conception of a behaving individual
that it has been difficult to dispense with similar explanations of
behavior. The practice resolves our anxiety with respect to
unexplained phenomena and is perpetuated because it does so.
283

284

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

Whatever the self may be, it is apparently not identical with the
physical organism. The organism behaves, while the self initiates 01
directs behavior. Moreover, more than one self is needed to explain
the behavior of one organism. A mere inconsistency in conduct from
one moment to the next is perhaps no problem, for a single self could
dictate different kinds of behavior from time to time. But there
appear to be two selves acting simultaneously and in different
ways when one self controls another or is aware of the activity of
another.
The same facts are commonly expressed in terms of "personalities."
The personality, like the self, is said to be responsible for features of
behavior. For example, delinquent behavior is sometimes attributed
to a psychopathic personality. Personalities may also be multiple.
Two or more personalities may appear in alternation or concurrently.
They are often in conflict with each other, and one may or may not
be aware of what the other is doing.
Multiple selves or personalities are often said to be systematically
related to each other. Freud conceived of the ego, superego, and id
as distinguishable agents within the organism. The id was
responsible for behavior which was ultimately reinforced with food,
water, sexual contact, and other primary biological reinforcers. It
was not unlike the selfish, aggressive "Old Adam" of JudeoChristian theology, preoccupied with the basic deprivations and
untouched by similar requirements on the parts of others. The
superego—the "conscience" of Judeo-Christian theology—was
responsible for the behavior which controlled the id. It used
techniques of self-control acquired from the group. When these
were verbal, they constituted "the still small voice of conscience."
The superego and the id were inevitably opposed to each other, and
Freud conceived of them as often in violent conflict. He appealed
to a third agent—the ego—which, besides attempting to reach a
compromise between the id and the superego, also dealt with the
practical exigencies of the environment.
We may quarrel with any analysis which appeals to a self or
personality as an inner determiner of action, but the facts which
have been represented with such devices cannot be ignored. The
three selves or personalities in the Freudian scheme represent
important

THE SELF

285

characteristics of behavior in a social milieu. Multiple
personalities which are less systematically related to each other
serve a similar function. A concept of self is not essential in an
analysis of behavior, but what is the alternative way of treating the
data?
THE SELF AS AN ORGANIZED
SYSTEM OF RESPONSES
The best way to dispose of any explanatory fiction is to examine
the facts upon which it is based. These usually prove to be, or
suggest, variables which are acceptable from the point of view of
scientific method. In the present case it appears that a self is
simply a device for representing a functionally unified system of
responses. In dealing with the data, we have to explain the
functional unity of such systems and the various relationships
which exist among them.
The unity of a self. A self may refer to a common mode of
action. Such expressions as "The scholar is Man Thinking" or "He
was a better talker than plumber" suggest personalities identified
with topographical subdivisions of behavior. In a single skin we
find the man of action and the dreamer, the solitary and the social
spirit.
On the other hand, a personality may be tied to a particular type
of occasion—when a system of responses is organized around a
given discriminative stimulus. Types of behavior which are
effective in achieving reinforcement upon occasion A are held
together and distinguished from those effective upon occasion B.
Thus one's personality in the bosom of one's family may be quite
different from that in the presence of intimate friends.
Responses which lead to a common reinforcement, regardless of
the situation, may also comprise a functional system. Here the
principal variable is deprivation. A motion to adjourn a meeting
which has run through the lunch hour may show "the hungry man
speaking." One's personality may be very different before and after
a satisfying meal. The libertine is very different from the ascetic
who achieves his reinforcement from the ethical group, but the two
may exist side by side in the same organism.
Emotional variables also establish personalities. Under the
proper circumstances the timid soul may give way to the
aggressive man.

286

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

The hero may struggle to conceal the coward who inhabits the same
skin.
The effects of drugs upon personality are well known. The
euphoria of the morphine addict represents a special repertoire of
responses the strength of which is attributable to an obvious variable.
The alcoholic wakes on the morrow a sadder and wiser man.
It is easy to overestimate the unity of a group of responses, and
unfortunately personification encourages us to do so. The concept of a
self may have an early advantage in representing a relatively coherent
response system, but it may lead us to expect consistencies and
functional integrities which do not exist. The alternative to the use
of the concept is simply to deal with demonstrated covariations in
the strength of responses.
Relations among selves. Organized systems of responses may be
related to each other in the same way as are single responses and for
the same reasons (Chapters XIV, XV, XVI). For example, two
response systems may be incompatible. If the relevant variables are
never present at the same time, the incompatibility is unimportant.
If the environment of which behavior is a function is not consistent
trom moment to moment, there is no reason to expect consistency
in behavior. The pious churchgoer on Sunday may become an
aggressive, unscrupulous businessman on Monday. He possesses
two response systems appropriate to different sets of circumstances,
and his inconsistency is no greater than that of the environment which
takes him to church on Sunday and to work on Monday. But the
controlling variables may come together; during a sermon, the
churchgoer may be asked to examine his business practices, or the
businessman may engage in commercial transactions with his
clergyman or his church. Trouble may then arise. Similarly, if an
individual has developed different repertoires with family and friends,
the two personalities come into conflict when he is with both at the
same time. Many of the dramatic struggles which flood the literature
on multiple personalities can be accounted for in the same way.
More systematic relations among personalities arise from the
controlling relations discussed in Chapters XV and XVI. In selfcontrol, for example, the responses to be controlled are organized around
certain

THE SELF

287

immediate primary reinforcements. To the extent that competition
for reinforcement makes this behavior aversive to others—and to this
extent only—we may refer to an anti-social personality, the id or Old
Adam. On the other hand, the controlling behavior engendered by
the community consists of a selected group of practices evolved in
the history of a particular culture because of their effect upon
antisocial behavior. To the extent that this behavior works to the
advantage of the community—and again to this extent only—we may
speak of a unitary conscience, social conscience, or superego. These
two sets of variables account, not only for the membership of each
group of responses, but for the relation between them which we
describe when we say that one personality is engaged in controlling
the other. Other kinds of relations between personalities are evident
in the processes of making a decision, solving a problem, or creating a
work of art.
An important relation between selves is the self-knowledge of
Chapter XVII. The behavior which we call knowing is due to a
particular kind of differential reinforcement. In even the most
rudimentary community such questions as "What did you do?" or
"What are you doing?" compel the individual to respond to his own
overt behavior. Probably no one is completely unselfconscious in
this sense. At the other extreme an advanced and relatively
nonpractical society produces the highly introspective or introverted
individual, whose repertoire of self-knowledge extends to his covert
behavior—a repertoire which in some cultures may be almost
nonexistent. An extensive development of self-knowledge is
common in certain Eastern cultures and is emphasized from time to
time in those of the West— for example, in the culte du moi of
French literature. An efficient repertoire of this sort is sometimes
set up in the individual for purposes of therapy. The patient under
psychoanalysis may become highly skilled in observing his own
covert behavior.
When an occasion arises upon which a report of the organism's
own behavior, particularly at the covert level, is likely to be
reinforced, the personality which makes the report is a specialist
trained by a special set of contingencies. The self which is
concerned with self-knowing functions concurrently with the
behavioral system which

288

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

it describes. But it is sometimes important to ask whether the
selves generated by other contingencies "know about each other."
The literature on multiple personalities raises the question as one
of "continuity of memory." It is also an important consideration in
the Freudian scheme: to what extent, for example, is the superego
aware of the behavior of the id? The contingencies which set up
the superego as a controlling system involve stimulation from the
behavior of the id, but they do not necessarily establish responses of
knowing about the behavior of the id. It is perhaps even less likely
that the id will know about the superego. The ego can scarcely deal
with conflicts between the other selves without responding to the
behavior attributed to them, but this does not mean that the ego
possesses a repertoire of knowing about such behavior in any other
sense.
THE ABSENCE OF SELF-KNOWLEDGE
One of the most striking facts about self-knowledge is that it
may be lacking. Several cases deserve comment.
A man may not know that he has done something. He may have
behaved in a given way, perhaps energetically, and nevertheless be
unable to describe what he has done. Examples range all the way
from the unnoticed verbal slip to extended amnesias in which large
areas of earlier behavior cannot be described by the individual
himself. The possibility that the behavior which cannot be
described may be covert raises an interesting theoretical problem,
since the existence of such behavior must be inferred, not only by
the scientist, but by the individual himself. We have seen that a
mathematician frequently cannot describe the process through
which he solves a problem. Although he may report the
preliminary stages of his investigation, his arrangement of
materials, and many tentative solutions, he may not be able to
describe the self-manipulation which presumably preceded the
required response which he suddenly emits. It is not always
necessary to infer that other behavior has actually occurred, but
under certain circumstances this inference may be justified. Since
authenticated overt behavior sometimes cannot be reported by the
individual, we have no reason to question the possibility of a covert
parallel.

THE SELF

289

A man may not know that he is doing something. Absent-minded
conduct, unconscious mannerisms, and mechanically habitual
behavior are common examples. More dramatic is automatic
writing, in which behavior taking place at the moment cannot be
described by the "rest of the organism "
A man may not know that he tends to, or is going to, do
something. He may be unaware of aggressive tendencies, of
unusual predilections, or of the high probability that he will follow
a given course of action.
A man may not recognize the variables of which his behavior is
a function. In the Verbal Summator, for example, the subject often
supposes himself to be repeating a verbal stimulus when it is easy
to identify variables lying elsewhere in his environment or history
which account for the behavior (Chapter XIV). Projective tests are
used for diagnostic purposes just because they reveal variables
which the individual himself cannot identify.
These phenomena are often viewed with surprise. How can the
individual fail to observe events which are so conspicuous and so
important? But perhaps we should be surprised that such events are
observed as often as they are. We have no reason to expect
discriminative behavior of this sort unless it has been generated by
suitable reinforcement. Self-knowledge is a special repertoire. The
crucial thing is not whether the behavior which a man fails to report
is actually observable by him, but whether he has ever been given
any reason to observe it.
Self-knowledge may, nevertheless, be lacking where appropriate
reinforcing circumstances have prevailed. Some instances may be
dismissed without extended comment. For example, the stimuli
supplied by behavior may be weak. One may be "unaware" of a
facial expression because of the inadequacy of the accompanying
self-stimulation. The subject in an experiment on muscle-reading
may not be aware of the slight responses which the reader detects
and uses in getting the subject to "tell" him the location of a hidden
object. The functional relation between behavior and a relevant
variable is especially likely to be of subtle physical dimensions. A
face in the crowd may be clear enough as a stimulus to generate a

290

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

mood, but the fact that it has done so may still not be noted. This
does not mean that the stimuli are below threshold, for they may be
brought into control in other ways. When we point out some part
of the behavior of an individual, an occasion is established under
which special reinforcement is accorded a discriminative reaction.
The fact that the individual then responds to his behavior is what
we mean by saying that he was "able to do so" in the first place.
Another case of "not knowing what one is doing" is explained by
the principle of prepotency. In the heat of battle there may be no
time to observe one's behavior, since strong responses conflict with
the discriminative response. Self-knowledge may also be lacking in
certain states of satiation and in sleep. One may talk in one's sleep or
behave in other ways "without knowing it." Behavior under the
influence of drugs—for example, alcohol—may also occur with a
minimum of self-observation. The effect of alcohol in reducing the
behavior of self-knowledge may be similar to that in reducing the
response to the conditioned aversive stimuli characteristic of guilt
or anxiety.
It has been argued that one cannot describe behavior after the
fact which one could not have described at the time. This appears to
explain our inability to recall the events of infancy, since the
behavior of the infant occurs before a repertoire of self-description
has been set up and therefore too soon to control such a repertoire.
The same explanation should apply to behavior unnoticed in the heat
of battle. However, it is possible that the rearousal of response on
the pattern of the conditioned reflex may supply the basis for a
description. In any case it is sometimes impossible to describe earlier
behavior which could have been described, and perhaps was
described, at the time it was emitted. An important reason why a
description may be lacking has still to be considered.
Repression. We have seen that punishment makes the stimuli
generated by punished behavior aversive. Any behavior which
reduces that stimulation is subsequently reinforced automatically. Now,
among the kinds of behavior most likely to generate conditioned
aversive stimuli as the result of punishment is the behavior

THE SELF

291

of observing the punished act or of observing the occasion for it or
any tendency to execute it. As the result of punishment, not only do
we engage in other behavior to the exclusion of punished forms, we
engage in other behavior to the exclusion of knowing about
punished behavior, in the sense of Chapter XVII. This may begin
simply as "not liking to think about" behavior which has led to
aversive consequences. It may then pass into the stage of not
thinking about it and eventually reach the point at which the
individual denies having behaved in a given way, in the face of
proof to the contrary.
The result is commonly called repression. As we saw in Chapters XII
and XIV, the individual may repress behavior simply in the sense of
engaging in competing forms, but we must now extend the meaning
of the term to include the repression of knowing about punished
behavior. This is a much more dramatic result, to which the term
"repression" is sometimes confined. The same formulation applies,
however. We do not appeal to any special act of repression but
rather to competing behavior which becomes extremely powerful
because it avoids aversive stimulation.
It is not always knowledge of the form of a response which is
repressed, because punishment is not always contingent upon form.
Aggressive behavior, for example, is not punished in warfare.
Imitative behavior is not often punished so long as it is actually
under the control of similar behavior on the part of others. For
example, when we emit obscene or blasphemous behavior in
testifying to an instance of it on the part of someone else, our
testimony may not be entirely free of conditioned aversive
consequences, and we may avoid testifying if possible; but the
aversive stimulation will be much less than that aroused by the same
behavior when it is not imitative. In experiments with the Verbal
Summator a subject will often emit aggressive, ungrammatical,
obscene, or blasphemous responses so long as he remains convinced
that he is correctly repeating speech patterns on a phonograph
record. He has been told to repeat what he hears and punishment is
not contingent upon the form of his behavior under these
circumstances, especially if a few objectionable samples are first
presented clearly. As soon as he is told that there are no comparable
speech patterns on the record, however, this type

292

THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE

of response usually becomes much less frequent. The individual
must now, so to speak, take the responsibility for the aggression,
obscenity, and so on. In other words, his behavior is now of a form
and under a controlling relation upon which punishment is
contingent. In such a case the subject will often refuse to
acknowledge that earlier stimuli were not of the form he reported.
A variation on the repression of a controlling relationship is
sometimes called "rationalization." The aversive report of a
functional relation may be repressed by reporting a fictitious
relationship. Instead of "refusing to recognize" the causes of our
behavior, we invent acceptable causes. If an aggressive attack
upon a child is due to emotional impulses of revenge, it is usually
punished by society; but if it is emitted because of supposed
consequences in shaping the behavior of the child in line with the
interests of society, it goes unpunished. We may conceal the
emotional causes of our aggressive behavior, either from ourselves
or from others, by arguing that the child ought to learn what sort of
effect he is having on people. We spank the child "for his own
good." In the same way we may delight in carrying bad news to
someone we dislike "because the sooner he knows it the better." It
is not the aggressive response which is repressed, but the response
of knowing about the aggressive tendency. The rationalization is
the repressing response which is successful in avoiding the
conditioned aversive stimulation generated by punishment.
SYMBOLS
In Chapter XIV, we saw that a group of responses strengthened
by a common variable might not all have the same aversive
consequences and that as a result of the principle of summation the
response with the least aversive consequence would emerge. In
more general terms, we may note that the property of a response
which achieves reinforcement need not coincide with the property
upon which punishment is based. A response may appear,
therefore, which achieves reinforcement while avoiding
punishment. For example, the visual stimulation of a nude figure
may be reinforcing because of previous connection with powerful
sexual reinforcement. But in many societies the behavior of
looking at such figures is severely punished. Under special

THE SELF

293

circumstances—as, for example, in an art museum—it is
possible to engage in this behavior and escape punishment. The
behavior of the artist may show a similar compromise. His art
must not be pornographic or too sensual, but while staying
within certain limits which avoid punishment, it may
nevertheless be successfully reinforcing for biological reasons.
In fantasy the individual makes a similar compromise between
seeing certain objects or patterns and avoiding aversive
stimulation: he daydreams in a given area but in such a way that
he does not generate too much guilt.
A symbol, as the term was used by Freud in the analysis of
dreams and art, is any temporal or spatial pattern which is
reinforcing because of similarity to another pattern but escapes
punishment because of differences. Thus an abstract sculpture
is symbolic of the human form if it is reinforcing because of
resemblances and if the artist would, in the absence of
punishment, have emphasized the resemblances. A musical
composition symbolizes sexual behavior if it is reinforcing
because of a similarity in temporal pattern and if it is emitted in
place of such behavior because it is different enough to escape
punishment.
The principal realm of the symbol is the dream which occurs
when we are asleep. This is a species of private event which is
extremely difficult to study and is, therefore, the subject of
much conflicting discussion. In a dream the individual engages
in private discriminative behavior, in the sense of Chapter XVII.
He sees, hears, feels, and so on, in the absence of the usual
stimuli. Controlling variables may sometimes be discovered in
the immediate environment or in the recent history of the
individual. In the perseverative dream, for example, one may
dream of driving a car if one has been driving for many hours.
More often, however, the relevant variables are harder to
identify. The attempt to do so is commonly called the
interpretation of dreams. Freud could demonstrate certain
plausible relations between dreams and variables in the life of
the individual. The present analysis is in essential agreement
with his interpretation. The individual is strongly disposed to
engage in behavior which achieves such reinforcements as
sexual contact or the infliction of damage upon others. These
kinds of behavior, however, are precisely the sort most

294THE INDIVIDUAL AS A WHOLE
likely to be punished. As a result the individual not only does not
overtly engage in such behavior, he cannot engage in it covertly or
see himself engaging in it covertly without automatic aversive selfstimulation. In the symbolic dream and in artistic or literary
behavior, however, he may engage in discriminative behavior which
is strengthened through stimulus- or response-induction by the
same variables but which is not liable to punishment. It is often
said or implied that some skillful agent engages in a sort of “dreamwork” to produce this result, but the result follows automatically
from the discrepancy between the properties of behavior upon
which reinforcement and punishment are contingent.

SECTION

THE BEHAVIOR OF
PEOPLE IN GROUPS

IV

CHAPTER

XIX

SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
Social behavior may be defined as the behavior of two or
more people with respect to one another or in concert with respect to
a common environment. It is often argued that this is different from
individual behavior and that there are "social situations" and "social
forces" which cannot be described in the language of natural science.
A special discipline called "social science" is said to be required
because of this apparent break in the continuity of nature. There
are, of course, many facts—concerning governments, wars,
migrations, economic conditions, cultural practices, and so on—which
would never present themselves for study if people did not gather
together and behave in groups, but whether the basic data are
fundamentally different is still a question. We are interested here in
the methods of the natural sciences as we see them at work in
physics, chemistry, and biology, and as we have so far applied them
in the field of behavior. How far will they carry us in the study of the
behavior of groups?
Many generalizations at the level of the group need not refer to
behavior at all. There is an old law in economics, called Gresham's
Law, which states that bad money drives good money out of
circulation. If we can agree as to what money is, whether it is good or
bad,
297

298

THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS

and when it is in circulation, we can express this general principle
without making specific reference to the use of money by
individuals. Similar generalizations are found in sociology, cultural
anthropology, linguistics, and history. But a "social law" must be
generated by the behavior of individuals. It is always an individual
who behaves, and he behaves with the same body and according to
the same processes as in a nonsocial situation. If an individual
possessing two pieces of money, one good and one bad, tends to
spend the bad and save the good—a tendency which may be
explained in terms of reinforcing contingencies—and if this is true
of a large number of people, the phenomenon described by
Gresham's Law arises. The individual behavior explains the group
phenomenon. Many economists feel the need for some such
explanation of all economic law, although there are others who
would accept the higher level of description as valid in its own
right.
We are concerned here simply with the extent to which an
analysis of the behavior of the individual which has received
substantial validation under the favorable conditions of a natural
science may contribute to the understanding of social phenomena.
To apply our analysis to the phenomena of the group is an
excellent way to test its adequacy, and if we are able to account for
the behavior of people in groups without using any new term or
presupposing any new process or principle, we shall have revealed
a promising simplicity in the data. This does not mean that the
social sciences will then inevitably state their generalizations in
terms of individual behavior, since another level of description
may also be valid and may well be more convenient.
THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT
Social behavior arises because one organism is important to
another as part of its environment. A first step, therefore, is an
analysis of the social environment and of any special features it may
possess.
Social reinforcement. Many reinforcements require the presence
of other people. In some of these, as in certain forms of sexual and
pugilistic behavior, the other person participates merely as an
object. We cannot describe the reinforcement without referring to
another

SOCIAL BEHAVIOR

299

organism. But social reinforcement is usually a matter of personal
mediation. When a mother feeds her child, the food, as a primary
reinforcer, is not social, but the mother's behavior in presenting it is.
The difference is slight—as one may see by comparing breastfeeding with bottle-feeding. Verbal behavior always involves social
reinforcement and derives its characteristic properties from this
fact. The response, "A glass of water, please," has no effect upon the
mechanical environment, but in an appropriate verbal environment
it may lead to primary reinforcement. In the field of social behavior
special emphasis is laid upon reinforcement with attention,
approval, affection, and submission. These important generalized
reinforcers are social because the process of generalization usually
requires the mediation of another organism. Negative
reinforcement—particularly as a form of punishment—is most
often administered by others in the form of unconditioned aversive
stimulation or of disapproval, contempt, ridicule, insult, and so on.
Behavior reinforced through the mediation of other people will
differ in many ways from behavior reinforced by the mechanical
environment. Social reinforcement varies from moment to
moment, depending upon the condition of the reinforcing agent.
Different responses may therefore achieve the same effect, and one
response may achieve different effects, depending upon the
occasion. As a result, social behavior is more extensive than
comparable behavior in a non-social environment. It is also more
flexible, in the sense that the organism may shift more readily from
one response to another when its behavior is not effective.
Since the reinforcing organism often may not respond
appropriately, reinforcement is likely to be intermittent. The result
will depend upon the schedule. An occasional success may fit the
pattern of variable-interval reinforcement, and the behavior will
show a stable intermediate strength. We might express this by
saying that we respond to people with less confidence than we
respond to the inanimate environment but are not so quickly
convinced that the reinforcing mechanism is "out of order." The
persistent behavior which we call teasing is generated by a
variable-ratio schedule, which arises from the fact that the
reinforcer responds only when a request has

300

THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS

been repeated until it becomes aversive—when it acquires nuisance
value.
The contingency established by a social reinforcing system may
slowly change. In teasing, for example, the mean ratio of unreinforced to reinforced responses may rise. The child who has gained
attention with three requests on the average may later find it
necessary to make five, then seven, and so on. The change
corresponds to an increasing tolerance for aversive stimulation in
the reinforcing person. Contingencies of positive reinforcement
may also drift in the same direction. When a reinforcing person
becomes harder and harder to please, the reinforcement is made
contingent upon more extensive or highly differentiated behavior. By
beginning with reasonable specifications and gradually increasing the
requirements, very demanding contingencies may be made effective
which would be quite powerless without this history. The result is
often a sort of human bondage. The process is easily demonstrated
in animal experimentation where extremely energetic, persistent, or
complicated responses which would otherwise be quite impossible
may be established through a gradual change in contingencies. A
special case arises in the use of piecework pay. As production
increases, and with it the wages received, the piecework scale may be
changed so that more work is required per unit of reinforcement. The
eventual result may be a much higher rate of production at only a
slight increase in pay— a condition of reinforcement which could not
have become effective except through some such gradual approach.
We have already noted another peculiarity of social reinforcement:
the reinforcing system is seldom independent of the behavior
reinforced. This is exemplified by the indulgent but ambitious
parent who withholds reinforcement when his child is behaving
energetically, either to demonstrate the child's ability or to make the
most efficient use of available reinforcers, but who reinforces an
early response when the child begins to show extinction. This is a
sort of combined ratio-and-interval reinforcement. Educational
reinforcements are in general of this sort. They are basically governed
by ratio schedules, but they are not unaffected by the level of the
behavior reinforced. As in piecework pay, more and more may be
demanded

SOCIAL BEHAVIOR

301

for each reinforcement as performance improves, but remedial
steps may be needed.
Schedules of reinforcement which adjust to the rate of the
behavior reinforced do not often occur in inorganic nature. The
reinforcing agent which modifies the contingency in terms of
the behavior must be sensitive and complex. But a reinforcing
system which is affected in this way may contain inherent
defects which lead to unstable behavior. This may explain why
the reinforcing contingencies of society cause undesirable
behavior more often than those apparently comparable
contingencies in inanimate nature.
The social stimulus. Another person is often an important
source of stimulation. Since some properties of such stimuli
appear to defy physical description, it has been tempting to
assume that a special process of intuition or empathy is
involved when we react to them. What, for example, are the
physical dimensions of a smile? In everyday life we identify
smiles with considerable accuracy and speed, but the scientist
would find it a difficult task. He would have to select some
identifying response in the individual under investigation—
perhaps the verbal response, "That is a smile"—and then
investigate all the facial expressions which evoked it. These
expressions would be physical patterns and presumably
susceptible to geometric analysis, but the number of different
patterns to be tested would be very great. Moreover, there would
be borderline instances where the stimulus control was defective
or varied from moment to moment.
That the final identification of the stimulus pattern called a
smile would be much more complicated and time-consuming
than the identification of a smile in daily life does not mean that
scientific observation neglects some important approach
available to the layman. The difference is that the scientist must
identify a stimulus with respect to the behavior of someone
else. He cannot trust his own personal reaction. In studying an
objective pattern as simple and as common to everyone as
"triangle," the scientist may safely use his own identification of
the pattern. But such a pattern as "smile" is another matter. A
social stimulus, like any other stimulus, becomes important in
controlling behavior because of the contin-

302

THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS

gencies into which it enters. The facial expressions which we
group together and call "smiles" are important because they are the
occasions upon which certain kinds of social behavior receive
certain kinds of reinforcement. Any unity in the stimulus class
follows from these contingencies. But these are determined by the
culture and by a particular history. Even in the behavior of a single
individual there may be several groups of patterns all of which
come to be called smiles if they all stand in the same relation to
reinforcing contingencies. The scientist may appeal to his own
culture or history only when it resembles that of the subject he is
studying. Even then he may be wrong, just as the layman's quick
practical reaction may be wrong, especially when he attempts to
identify a smile in a different culture.
This issue is far reaching because it applies to many descriptive
terms, such as "friendly" and "aggressive," without which many
students of social behavior would feel lost. The nonscientist
working within his own culture may satisfactorily describe the
behavior of others with expressions of this sort. Certain patterns of
behavior have become important to him because of the
reinforcements based upon them: he judges behavior to be friendly
or unfriendly by its social consequences. But his frequent success
does not mean that there are objective aspects of behavior which
are as independent of the behavior of the observer as are such
geometrical forms as squares, circles, and triangles. He is observing
an objective event—the behavior of an organism; there is no
question here of physical status, but only of the significance of
classificatory terms. The geometrical properties of "friendliness" or
"aggressiveness" depend upon the culture, change with the culture,
and vary with the individual's experience within a single culture.
Some social stimuli are also frequently set apart because a very
slight physical event appears to have an extremely powerful effect.
But this is true of many nonsocial stimuli as well; to one who has
been injured in a fire a faint smell of smoke may be a stimulus of
tremendous power. Social stimuli are important because the social
reinforcers with which they are correlated are important. An
example of the surprising power of an apparently trivial event is
the common

SOCIAL BEHAVIOR

303

experience of "catching someone's eye." Under certain
circumstances the change in behavior which follows may be
considerable, and this has led to the belief that some nonphysical
"understanding" passes from one person to another. But the
reinforcing contingencies offer an alternative explanation. Our
behavior may be very different in the presence or absence of a
particular person. When we simply see such a person in a crowd,
our available repertoire immediately changes. If, in addition, we
catch his eye, we fall under the control of an even more restrictive
stimulus—he is not only present, he is watching us. The same
effect might arise without catching his eye if we saw him looking
at us in a mirror. When we catch his eye, we also know that he
knows that we are looking at him. A much narrower repertoire of
behavior is under the control of this specific stimulus: if we are to
behave in a way which he censures, it will now be not only in
opposition to his wishes but brazen. It may also be important that
"we know that he knows that we know that he is looking at us" and
so on. (What is meant by "know" in these statements is in accord
with the analysis in Chapters VIII and XVI.) In catching someone's
eye, in short, a social stimulus suddenly arises which is important
because of the reinforcements which depend upon it. The
importance will vary with the occasion. We may catch someone's
eye in a flirtation, under amusing circumstances, at a moment of
common guilt, and so on— with an appropriate degree of control
in each case. The importance of the event is seen in the use we
make of the behavior of "looking someone in the eye" as a test of
other variables responsible for such characteristics of behavior as
honesty, brazenness, embarrassment, or guilt.
Social stimuli are important to those to whom social
reinforcement is important. The salesman, the courtier, the
entertainer, the seducer, the child striving for the favor of his
parents, the "climber" advancing from one social level to another,
the politically ambitious—all are likely to be affected by subtle
properties of human behavior, associated with favor or disapproval,
which are overlooked by many people. It is significant that the
novelist, as a specialist in the description of human behavior, often
shows an early history in which social reinforcement has been
especially important.

304

THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS

The social stimulus which is least likely to vary from culture to
culture is that which controls the imitative behavior described in
Chapter VII. The ultimate consequences of imitative behavior may
be peculiar to the culture, but the correspondence between the
behavior of the imitator and that of the imitatee is relatively
independent of it. Imitative behavior is not entirely free of style or
convention, but the special features of the imitative repertoire
characteristic of a group are slight. When a sizable repertoire has
once been developed, imitation may be so skillful, so easy, so
"instinctive," that we are likely to attribute it to some such special
mode of interpersonal contact as empathy. It is easy to point to a
history of reinforcement, however, which generates behavior of this
sort.
THE SOCIAL EPISODE
We may analyze a social episode by considering one organism at a
time. Among the variables to be considered are those generated by
a second organism. We then consider the behavior of the second
organism, assuming the first as a source of variables. By putting the
analyses together we reconstruct the episode. The account is
complete if it embraces all the variables needed to account for the
behavior of the individuals. Consider, for example, the interaction
between predator and prey called "stalking." We may limit
ourselves to that behavior of the predator which reduces the
distance between itself and its prey and that behavior of the prey
which increases the distance. A reduction in the distance is
positively reinforcing to the predator and negatively reinforcing to
the prey; an increase is negatively reinforcing to the predator and
positively reinforcing to the prey. If the predator is stimulated by
the prey, but not vice versa, then the predator simply reduces the
distance between itself and the prey as rapidly as possible. If the
prey is stimulated by the predator, however, it will respond by
increasing the distance. This need not be open flight, but simply
any movement sufficient to keep the distance above a critical value.
In the behavior called stalking the predator reduces the distance as
rapidly as possible without stimulating the prey to increase it.
When the distance has become short enough, the predator may

SOCIAL BEHAVIOR

305

break into open pursuit, and the prey into open flight. A different
sort of interaction follows.
A similar formulation may be applied where "distance" is not so
simple as in movement in space. In conversation, for example, one
speaker may approach a topic from which another moves away
uneasily. The first may be said to stalk the second if he approaches
the topic in such a way as to avoid stimulating the second to
escape. We eliminate the figure of speech in "approaching a topic"
by analyzing the reinforcing and aversive properties of verbal
stimuli.
Another example of a social episode is leading and following.
This generally arises when two or more individuals are reinforced
by a single external system which requires their combined action
—for example, when two men pull on a rope which cannot be
moved by either one alone. The behavior of one is similar to that
of the other, and the interaction may be slight. If the timing is
important, however, one man will pace the other. The first sets a
rhythmic pattern relatively independent of the second; the second
times his behavior by that of the first. The first may facilitate this
by amplifying the stimuli which affect the second—as by saying,
"All together now, one, two, three, pull!" Collateral behavior with a
marked temporal pattern
—for example, a sea chanty—may reduce the importance of the
leader but will not eliminate it.
The nature of leading and following is clearer when the two
kinds of behavior differ considerably and the contingency of
reinforcement is complex. A division of labor is usually then
required. The leader is primarily under the control of external
variables, while the follower is under the control of the leader. A
simple example is ballroom-dancing. The reinforcing
consequences—both positive and negative
—depend upon a double contingency: (1) the dancers must
execute certain sequences of steps in certain directions with
respect to the available space and (2) the behavior of one must be
timed to correspond with that of the other. This double
contingency is usually divided between the dancers. The leader
sets the pattern and responds to the available space; the follower is
controlled by the movements of the leader and responds
appropriately to satisfy the second contingency.

306

THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS

It is easy to set up cooperative situations with two or more
experimental organisms and to observe the emergence of leading
and following. In a demonstration experiment two pigeons are
placed in adjacent cages separated by a glass plate. Side by side
near the glass are two vertical columns of three buttons each, one
column being available to each pigeon. The apparatus is set to
reinforce both pigeons with food but only when they peck
corresponding buttons simultaneously. Only one pair of buttons is
effective at any one time. The situation calls for a rather
complicated cooperation. The pigeons must explore the three pairs
to discover which is effective, and they must strike both buttons in
each pair at the same time. These contingencies must be divided.
One bird—the leader—explores the buttons, striking them in some
characteristic order or more or less at random. The other bird—the
follower—strikes the button opposite whichever button is being
struck by the leader. The behavior of the follower is controlled
almost exclusively by the behavior of the leader, whose behavior in
turn is controlled by the apparatus which randomizes the
reinforcements among the three pairs of buttons. Two followers or
two leaders placed together can solve the problem only
accidentally. The function of leader may shift from one bird to
another over a period of time, and a temporary condition may arise
in which both are followers. The behavior then resembles that of
two people who, meeting under circumstances where the
convention of passing on the right is not strongly observed,
oscillate from side to side before passing.
Between such an experiment and the relation of leader to
follower in politics, for example, there is more than a simple
analogy. Most cultures produce some people whose behavior is
mainly controlled by the exigencies of a given situation. The same
cultures also produce people whose behavior is controlled mainly
by the behavior of others. Some such division of the contingencies
in any cooperative venture seems to be required. The leader is not
wholly independent of the follower, however, for his behavior
requires the support of corresponding behavior on the part of
others, and to the extent that cooperation is necessary, the leader
is, in fact, led by his followers.

SOCIAL BEHAVIOR

307

Verbal episodes. Verbal behavior supplies many examples in which
one person is said to have an effect upon another beyond the scope
of the physical sciences. Words are said to "symbolize" or
"express" ideas or meanings, which are then "communicated" to
the listener. An alternative formulation would require too much
space here,1 but a single example may suggest how this sort of
social behavior may be brought within range of a natural science.
Consider a simple episode in which A asks B for a cigarette and
gets one. To account for the occurrence and maintenance of this
behavior we have to show that A provides adequate stimuli and
reinforcement for B and vice versa. A's response, "Give me a
cigarette," would be quite ineffective in a purely mechanical
environment. It has been conditioned by a verbal community
which occasionally reinforces it in a particular way. A has long
since formed a discrimination by virtue of which the response is not
emitted in the absence of a member of that community. He has also
probably formed more subtle discriminations in which he is more
likely to respond in the presence of an "easy touch." B has either
reinforced this response in the past or resembles someone who has.
The first interchange between the two is in the direction of B to A:
B is a discriminative stimulus in the presence of which A emits the
verbal response. The second interchange is in the direction A to B:
the response generates auditory stimuli acting upon B. If B is
already disposed to give a cigarette to A—for example, if B is
"anxious to please A" or "in love with A," the auditory pattern is a
discriminative stimulus for the response of giving a cigarette. B
does not offer cigarettes indiscriminately; he waits for a response
from A as an occasion upon which a cigarette will be accepted. A's
acceptance depends upon a condition of deprivation in which the
receipt of a cigarette is reinforcing. This is also the condition in
which A emits the response, "Give me a cigarette," and the
contingency which comes to control B's behavior is thus
established. The third interchange is A's receipt of the cigarette
from B. This is the reinforcement of A's original response and
completes our account of it. If B is reinforced simply by evidence
of the effect of the cigarette upon A, we may consider B's account
closed also. But such behavior is more likely to remain a
1

See footnote reference, page 210.

308

THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS

stable part of the culture if these evidences are made conspicuous.
If A not only accepts the cigarette but also says, "Thank you," a I
fourth interchange takes place: the auditory stimulus is a conditioned
reinforcer to B, and A produces it just because it is. B may in turn f
increase the likelihood of future "Thank you's" on the part of A by
saying, "Not at all."
When B's behavior in responding to A's verbal response is
already strong, we call A's response a "request." If B's behavior
requires other conditions, we have to reclassify A's response. If
"Give me a cigarette" is not only the occasion for a particular
response but also a conditioned aversive stimulus from which B
can escape only by complying, then A's response is a "demand." In
this case, B's behavior is reinforced by a reduction in the threat
generated by A's demand, and A's "Thank you" is mainly effective
as a conspicuous indication that the threat has been reduced.
Even such a brief episode is surprisingly complex, but the four
or five interchanges between A and B can all be specified in
physical terms and can scarcely be ignored if we are to take such
an analysis seriously. That the complete episode occupies only a
few seconds does not excuse us from the responsibility of
identifying and observing all its features.
Unstable interaction. Although many of these interlocking
social systems are stable, others show a progressive change. A
trivial example is the behavior of a group of people who enter an
unfamiliar room containing a sign which reads, "Silence, please."
Such a verbal stimulus is generally effective only in combination
with the behavior of other members of the group. If many people
are talking noisily, the sign may have little or no effect. But let us
assume that our group enters silently. After a moment two
members least under the control of the sign begin to whisper. This
slightly alters the situation for other members so that they also
begin to whisper. This alters the situation for the two who are least
under the control of the sign, and they then begin to speak in a low
voice. This further changes the situation for the others, who also
begin to speak in low voices. Eventually the conversation may be
quite noisy. This is a simple "auto-

SOCIAL BEHAVIOR

309

catalytic" process arising from a repeated interchange between the
members of the group.
Another example is a practice common on sailing ships in the
eighteenth century. Sailors would amuse themselves by tying
several boys or younger men in a ring to a mast by their left hands,
their right hands remaining free. Each boy was given a stick or
whip and told to strike the boy in front of him whenever he felt
himself being struck by the boy behind. The game was begun by
striking one boy lightly. This boy then struck the boy ahead of him,
who in turn struck the boy next ahead, and so on. Even though it
was clearly in the interest of the group that all blows be gentle, the
inevitable result was a furious lashing. The unstable elements in
this interlocking system are easy to identify. We cannot assume
that each boy gave precisely the kind of blow he received because
this is not an easy comparison to make. It is probable that he
underestimated the strength of the blows he gave. The slightest
tendency to give a little harder than he received would produce the
ultimate effect. Moreover, repeated blows probably generate an
emotional disposition in which one naturally strikes harder. A
comparable instability is seen when two individuals engage in a
casual conversation which leads to a vituperative quarrel. The
aggressive effect of a remark is likely to be underestimated by the
man who makes it, and repeated effects generate further
aggression. The principle is particularly dangerous when the
conversation consists of an exchange of notes between
governments.
SUPPORTING VARIABLES IN
THE SOCIAL EPISODE
Although the interchange between two or more individuals
whose behavior is interlocked in a social system must be explained
in its entirety, certain variables may remain obscure. For example,
we often observe merely that one person is predisposed to act with
respect to another in certain ways. The mother caring for her child
is a familiar case in point. The social emotions are by definition
observed simply as predispositions to act in ways which may be
positively or negatively reinforcing to others. Such terms as
"favor" and "friendship"

310

THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS

refer to tendencies to administer positive reinforcement, and love
might be analyzed as the mutual tendency of two individuals to
reinforce each other, where the reinforcement may or may not be
sexual.
Sometimes a reciprocal interchange explains the behavior in terms
of reinforcement. Each individual has something to offer by way of
reinforcing the other, and once established, the interchange sustains
itself. We may detect mutual reinforcement in the case of mother
and child. Instead of tendencies to behave in certain ways, they may
illustrate tendencies to be reinforced by certain social stimuli. Aside
from this, the group may manipulate special variables to generate
tendencies to behave in ways which result in the reinforcement of
others. The group may reinforce the individual for telling the truth,
helping others, returning favors, and reinforcing others in turn for
doing the same. The Golden Rule is a generalized statement of the
behavior thus supported by the group. Many important interlocking
systems of social behavior could not be maintained without such
conventional practices. This is an important point in explaining the
success of the cultural practices characteristic of a group (Chapter
XXVIII).
To the extent that prior reinforcement by the group determines
the suitability of the behavior of the individual for an interlocking
system, the system itself is not wholly self-sustaining. The instability
is demonstrated when an individual who is not adequately controlled
by the culture gains a temporary personal advantage by exploiting
the system. He lies, refuses to return a favor, or breaks a promise, but
this exploitation of the system eventually leads to its deterioration.
The boy in the fable cries, "Wolf!" because certain patterns of social
behavior have been established by the community and he finds the
resulting behavior of his neighbors amusing. The aggressive door-todoor salesman imposes upon the good manners of the housewife to
hold her attention in the same way. In each case the system
eventually breaks down: the neighbors no longer respond to the cry
of "Wolf!" and the housewife slams the door.
The behavior of two individuals may be related in a social episode,
not primarily through an interchange between them, but through

SOCIAL BEHAVIOR

311

common external variables. The classic example is competition.
Two individuals come into competition when the behavior of one
can be reinforced only at the cost of the reinforcement of the other.
Social behavior as here defined is not necessarily involved.
Catching a rabbit before it runs away is not very different from
catching it before someone else does. In the latter case, a social
interchange may occur as a by-product if one individual attacks the
other. Cooperation, in which the reinforcement of two or more
individuals depends upon the behavior of both or all of them, is
obviously not the opposite of competition, for it appears to require
an interlocking system.
THE GROUP AS A BEHAVING UNIT
It is common to speak of families, clans, nations, races, and other
groups as if they were individuals. Such concepts as "the group
mind," "the instinct of the herd," and "national character" have
been invented to support this practice. It is always an individual
who behaves, however. The problem presented by the larger group
is to explain why many individuals behave together. Why does a
boy join a gang? Why does a man join a club or fall in with a
lynching mob? We may answer questions of this sort by examining
the variables generated by the group which encourage the behavior
of joining and conforming. We cannot do this simply by saying that
two individuals will behave together cooperatively if it is "in their
common interest to do so." We must point to specific variables
affecting the behavior of each of them. From a practical point of
view, as in setting up cooperative behavior in the pigeon
demonstration just described, an analysis of the relevant variables
is also essential. The particular contingencies controlling the
behavior of the cooperators must be carefully maintained.
Some progress toward explaining participation in a group is
made by the analysis of imitation. In general, behaving as others
behave is likely to be reinforcing. Stopping to look in a store
window which has already attracted a crowd is more likely to be
reinforced than stopping to look in store windows which have not
attracted crowds. Using words which have already been used by
others, rather than strange terms, is more likely to be reinforced
positively or to be free

312

THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS

of aversive consequences. Situations of this sort multiplied a
thousandfold generate and sustain an enormous tendency to behave
as others are behaving.
To this principle we must add another of perhaps greater
importance. If it is always the individual who behaves, it is
nevertheless the group which has the more powerful effect. By joining
a group the individual increases his power to achieve reinforcement.
The man who pulls on a rope is reinforced by the movement of the
rope regardless of the fact that others may need to be pulling at the
same time. The man attired in full uniform, parading smartly down
the street, is reinforced by the acclaim of the crowd even though it
would not be forthcoming if he were marching alone. The coward in
the lynching mob is reinforced when his victim writhes in terror as
he shouts at him—regardless of the fact that a hundred others are,
and must be, shouting at him also. The reinforcing consequences
generated by the group easily exceed the sums of the consequences
which could be achieved by the members acting separately. The total
reinforcing effect is enormously increased.
The interchanges within a group and the heightened effect of the
group upon the environment may be studied within the framework
of a natural science. They need to be explored further before we
accept the proposition that there are social units, forces, and laws
which require scientific methods of a fundamentally different sort.

CHAPTER XX

PERSONAL CONTROL

Let us look at a social episode from the point of view of
one of the participants. We have seen that A may generate
important variables affecting the behavior of B. The change in B
may not have a return effect upon A. For example, B may look in a
shop window because he sees A doing so although A may be
unaffected by B's action. Usually, however, as in many of the
examples already analyzed, the resulting change in B's behavior
has an effect upon A. In the important case now to be considered
the effect is one of reinforcement. A behaves in a way which alters
B's behavior because of the consequences which B's behavior has
for A. We say, colloquially, that A is deliberately controlling B.
This does not mean that A is necessarily able to identify the cause
or effect of his action. When a baby cries for his mother's attention,
he generates an aversive stimulus which he withdraws when the
mother pays attention. As a result, the behavior of the mother in
paying attention is reinforced. Neither the baby nor the mother
may understand the processes involved, but we may still say that
the baby has learned how to control his mother in this respect. It is
this asymmetrical social relation which we have now to
investigate. Our task is to evaluate the various ways in which one
person controls another.
313

314

THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS

CONTROL OF VARIABLES
The power to manipulate the conditions affecting another
individual may be delegated to the controlling individual by one of
the organized agencies to be discussed in Section V. The controller's
relation to the controllee may then be characterized as that of
governor to governed, priest to communicant, therapist to patient,
employer to employee, teacher to pupil, and so on. But almost
everyone controls some relevant variables, apart from such a role,
which he may employ to his own advantage. This we may speak of
as personal control. The kind and extent depend upon the personal
endowment and skill of the controller. The strong man uses the
variables which derive from his strength. The wealthy man resorts
to money. The pretty girl uses primary or conditioned sexual
reinforcement. The weakling becomes a sycophant. The shrew
controls through aversive stimulation.
When compared with the practices of organized agencies,
personal control is nevertheless weak. A man of great wealth, a
gangster with a gun, or an extremely beautiful woman is the
occasional exception to the rule that the individual is rarely, simply
as an individual, able to alter the variables affecting other people in
very important ways. But he may to some extent offset this
shortcoming because he is in an especially favorable position in
dealing with the idiosyncrasies of the controllee. Organized
agencies manipulate variables common to groups of people, but
the individual can ask whether a particular controllee is sensitive to
certain kinds of stimuli, whether he responds to certain kinds of
reinforcement, whether at the moment he exhibits certain states of
deprivation, and so on. Whatever variables are available may be
more wisely selected and used.
The limitations of personal control have led to a standard
practice in which available variables are first manipulated in order
to establish and maintain contact between controller and
controllee. If this move is successful, further possibilities of control
may then be developed. The first task of the salesman is to keep his
prospect within range—to keep the housewife at the door or the
customer in the shop. If he has sufficient control to achieve this, he
may then safely develop

PERSONAL CONTROL

315

other lines. The counselor, whether he is simply a friend or a
professional therapist, faces a similar problem. His first task is to
make sure that the man he is counseling continues to listen and to
return for further counsel. If this can be done, other lines of
control may then be opened.
The preliminary stage of maintaining contact with the controllee
is best seen in the career of the entertainer or, somewhat less
obviously, the writer, artist, or musician. People of this sort exploit
their relatively poor sources of control almost exclusively to
increase the probability that the controllee will come back for
more. The principal technique is reinforcement. We might say, in
fact, that it is the business of the entertainer, writer, artist, or
musician to create reinforcing events. In the process of creation, as
we saw in Chapter XVI, a medium may be manipulated to reveal
self-reinforcing properties, but the "universality" of a work of art
is measured by the number of other people who also find it
reinforcing. If the artist has no further message, this is the extent
of the personal control he wields. The propagandist, however,
advances to a more specific assignment when the attention, interest,
or patronage of his audience has once been assured.
TECHNIQUES OF CONTROL
The techniques available in controlling behavior were reviewed
in Chapter XV in connection with self-control, but there are
several special features which call for comment in the application
to the control of others. Physical force is the most immediately
effective technique available to those who have the necessary
power. In its most immediately personal form it is exemplified by
the wrestler who suppresses the behavior of his opponent through
sheer physical restraint. The most extreme form of restraint is
death: the individual is kept from behaving by being killed. Less
extreme forms include the use of handcuffs, strait jackets, jails,
concentration camps, and so on. These all suggest violent control,
often for extremely selfish purposes, but even highly civilized
societies use physical restraint in the control of children, criminals,
and the dangerously insane.
The use of force has obvious disadvantages as a controlling
tech-

316

THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS

nique. It usually requires the sustained attention of the controller.
It is almost exclusively concerned with the prevention of behavior,
and hence is of little value in increasing the probability of action.
It generates strong emotional dispositions to counterattack. It
cannot be applied to all forms of behavior; handcuffs restrain part
of a man's rage but not all of it. It is not effective upon behavior at
the private level, as we suggest when we say that one cannot
imprison a man's thoughts.
For all these reasons, control through physical restraint is not so
promising a possibility as it may at first appear. It is, of course,
never available to those who lack the necessary power. In the long
run the use of force usually gives way to other techniques which
employ genuine processes of behavior. Here the controller need not
have the power to coerce or restrain behavior directly but may
affect it indirectly by altering the environment.
Manipulating stimuli. Most of the techniques of self-control
through the manipulation of stimuli may be directly extended to
the behavior of others. We present unconditioned or conditioned
stimuli to elicit reflex responses when we give an emetic to induce
vomiting; and we arrange discriminative occasions for behavior
when we display merchandise in a store in such a way that the
customer is more likely to purchase it. We use stimuli to eliminate
behavior by evoking incompatible responses. When women
employed in a factory created a hazard by hurrying down a
corridor at the end of the day, the manager put mirrors along the
corridor to evoke responses of adjusting wearing apparel and
applying cosmetics. This behavior proved to be incompatible with
hurrying. We use supplemental stimuli to induce behavior when we
"interpret a situation favorably," as when the salesman assures the
potential buyer that he will enjoy or profit from a purchase, or when
we encourage someone to join us on a given occasion by assuring
him of enjoyable consequences. A particularly effective mode of
stimulation evokes the imitative repertoire discussed in Chapters VII
and XIX: the businessman who is resorting to alcohol as a technique
of control induces his prospect to have another drink by ordering
another himself. The imitative repertoire is the basis of testimonial
advertising. People are shown using various prod-

PERSONAL CONTROL

317

ucts and engaging in various activities, and the effect is to strengthen
comparable behavior in the viewer. The whole field of verbal behavior
exemplifies the use of stimuli in personal control. The speaker
generates auditory patterns which are effective because of the
listener's history in a given verbal community.
Reinforcement as a technique of control. If the individual
possesses money or goods, he may use them for purposes of
reinforcement in the form of wages, bribes, or gratuities. If he is in
a position to do someone a favor, he can reinforce accordingly. He
may also be able to offer his own physical labor, either to an
employer in return for wages or to a friend in return for a particular
action. Sexual stimulation is a common form of reinforcement and
is widely used in personal control.
In practice many of these reinforcers are preceded by more
immediate conditioned reinforcers. Money is itself a conditioned
rein-forcer, but primary reinforcement may be further postponed
when a check is given which is later converted into cash. Contracts
and verbal promises are other forms of conditioned reinforcers
available in personal control. Minor examples include praise and
thanks. These deferred reinforcements are likely to be unreliable,
however. Praise may give way to flattery, checks may not be
honored, and promises may be made in bad faith. But it may be some
time before the interlocking social system deteriorates to the point
at which there is no longer a reinforcing effect.
Aversive stimulation. Negative reinforcement is employed in
personal control in the aversive cry of the child and the nuisance
value of the behavior of an adult. Control is achieved by making the
withdrawal of these aversive stimuli contingent upon the response to
be strengthened. Forgiveness and acquittal are similarly reinforcing.
The bully who pommels another boy until he cries "Uncle!", the
police who employ the third degree to obtain a confession, and the
nation which makes war until the enemy surrenders, exemplify the
same use of aversive stimulation. Conditioned aversive stimulation
used in the same way is exemplified by the "dare" or by other ways
of shaming someone into acting.

318

THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS

Punishment. The individual who is able to present a positive
reinforcement or withdraw a negative is usually also able to
present the negative or withdraw the positive and is therefore able
to punish. Punishment is not to be confused with physical restraint
or the use of aversive stimulation. All three forms of control are
usually available to the same individual because of the nature of
the power of control, but confining a man in jail to keep him from
behaving in a certain way or to induce him to behave in a certain
way in order to be released is not the same as confining him in
order to reduce his tendency to behave in a given way in the future.
In the control of psychotic patients confinement is a means of
restraint rather than punishment; and, conversely, some forms of
punishment involve at best only momentary restraint. Punishment
as a technique of control has all the disadvantages of physical
restraint and, in addition, all the weaknesses pointed out in Chapter
XII. Moreover, it generates emotional dispositions which may be
disadvantageous or even dangerous to both controller and controllee,
as we shall see in discussing psychotherapy in Chapter XXIV.
Punishment as the removal of positive reinforcers, conditioned
or unconditioned, is exemplified by cutting a dependent off
"without a cent," refusing to supply food or shelter previously
given, imposing economic sanctions, and refusing customary
sexual contact. Another important example is withholding
customary social stimulation, as in snubbing an acquaintance or
"putting a schoolboy on silence." Lesser degrees of such
punishments are social neglect and inattention. None of these are
punishments in their own right, but only when made contingent
upon behavior.
Punishment in the form of presenting aversive stimuli is
commoner. Physical injury is exemplified by spanking a child,
striking an adult, and attacking a nation. Conditioned aversive
stimuli, many of them verbal, are exemplified by disapproval and
criticism, by damning and cursing, by ridicule, and by the carrying
of bad news. These again are punishments only when contingent
upon behavior. We have seen that it is questionable whether they
permanently reduce any tendency to behave. They all generate
emotional dispositions which are par-

PERSONAL CONTROL

319

ticularly disorganizing and which may in turn call for further remedial
control.
Pointing up contingencies of reinforcement. It is possible to use
techniques based upon reinforcement and punishment without being able
to control the events in question. A considerable effect may be achieved
simply by clarifying the relation between behavior and its consequences.
The instructor in sports, crafts, or artistic activities may directly reinforce
the behavior he is trying to establish, but he may also simply point up the
contingency between a given form of behavior and the result—"Notice
the effect you get when you hold the brush this way," "Strike the key this
way and see if it isn't easier," "If you swing the club this way, you won't
slice the ball," and so on. The controller may make use of reinforcing
events which have occurred without his intervention by making the
contingencies more likely to modify the behavior of the controllee.
Punishing consequences are pointed up by such expressions as "Now, see
what you've done," "This is costing you money," or "You are responsible
for all this." Other techniques of emphasizing reinforcing contingencies
consist of arranging various schedules of reinforcement—"Play this
passage until you can play it without a mistake"—and programs of
differential reinforcement—"When you can clear the bar at this height,
move it one inch higher."
Deprivation and satiation. If we are controlling a child's behavior
through reinforcement with candy, it is well to make sure that little candy
is received at other times. Deprivation may also be used to control
behavior which has been strengthened by generalized rein-forcers. To
evoke behavior which has been reinforced with money, one procedure is
to deprive the individual in such a way as to strengthen behavior which
can be executed only with money. For example, a man is made
susceptible to bribery by encouraging him to follow a mode of living in
which money is an important requirement. Satiation is a common
technique of control which is particularly effective in eliminating
unwanted behavior. A child stops teasing for candy when he is given all
he will eat. One may satiate an aggressor by submitting to him—by
"turning the other cheek."

320

THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS

Emotion. We are sometimes interested in controlling the reflex
responses characteristic of emotion, as in making someone laugh,
blush, or cry. We are more likely to be interested in establishing
emotional predispositions. We have noted the important case in
which someone is "favorably inclined" toward a particular person
or set of circumstances. Building morale is usually concerned with
generating such a predisposition. The effect often follows from the
same events which reinforce behavior. Gratuities, for example,
serve as a mode of control not only through reinforcement but by
generating "favorable attitudes." More specific predispositions are
also generated with appropriate stimuli—as when Christmas music
is played in a store to encourage "good will toward men" and the
purchase of gifts. Other techniques of altering emotional
predispositions are suggested by terms like "jollying," "cajoling,"
"haranguing," "seducing," "inciting," "allaying fear," and "turning
away wrath." The actual variables responsible for a given
predisposition need to be analyzed in each case.
The use of drugs. The drug most commonly used in personal
control is alcohol. Like certain emotional operations it is often
used to dispose an individual toward favorable action. It appears
also to act directly in reducing anxieties or alarm and may be used
for that reason—for example, in closing a business deal or in getting
someone to talk about a confidential matter. It is also used as a
positive rein-forcer. As a habit-forming drug it makes possible a
special form of deprivation, in which behavior which has been
reinforced with alcohol may be made so powerful that the
individual will "do anything" for a drink. Such drugs as morphine
and cocaine have, as we have seen, been used to create the
possibility of using other powerful deprivations for the same
purpose. Other drugs are employed in the control of psychotic
behavior and in connection with governmental or police functions
—for example, the so-called truth serums.
OBJECTIONS TO PERSONAL CONTROL
Students of human behavior often avoid the issue of control and
even regard it as in bad taste to suggest that deliberate control is

PERSONAL CONTROL

321

ever undertaken. The codification of controlling practices is left
to the Machiavellis and Lord Chesterfields. Psychologists,
sociologists, and anthropologists usually prefer theories of
behavior in which control is minimized or denied, and we shall
see that proposed changes in governmental design are usually
promoted by pointing to their effect in maximizing freedom. All
this appears to be due to the fact that control is frequently
aversive to the controllee. Techniques based upon the use of
force, particularly punishment or the threat of punishment, are
aversive by definition, and techniques which appeal to other
processes are also objectionable when, as is usually the case,
the ultimate advantage to the controller is opposed to the
interest of the controllee.
One effect upon the controllee is to induce him to engage in
countercontrol. He may show an emotional reaction of anger or
frustration including operant behavior which injures or is
otherwise aversive to the controller. Such behavior may have
been reinforced by the reduction in similar aversive
consequences. The importance of reinforcement is seen in the
fact that we are much more likely to respond in this way to
social than to nonsocial control. If we are forced to step off the
sidewalk by a large branch blown down by the wind, we shall
probably not exhibit a strong emotional reaction, but if we are
forced to step off in the same way by a group of idle people,
aggressive behavior—verbal and nonverbal—may be generated.
The aggressive behavior has probably alleviated similar social
conditions but has had little or no effect upon branches of trees.
It is not necessarily more "natural" to react emotionally to social
than to nonsocial restraint.
Because of the aversive consequences of being controlled, the
individual who undertakes to control other people is likely to be
counter-controlled by all of them. The power which "other
people" generate when they act as a group is discussed in
Chapter XXI. Part of such countercontrol is assigned to specific
religious or governmental agencies which possess the power to
manipulate important variables. The opposition to control is
likely to be directed toward the most objectionable forms—the
use of force and conspicuous instances of exploitation, undue
influence, or gross misrepresentation—but it may

322

THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS

extend to any control which is "deliberately" exerted because of
the consequences to the controller. As a result of the principal
technique employed in countercontrol, the individual who engages
in control automatically generates conditioned aversive selfstimulation—he "feels guilty" about exerting control. He is then
automatically reinforced for doing something else, for giving up any
attempt to control, and for declaring himself opposed to personal
control in general.
The countercontrol exercised by the group and by certain
agencies may explain our hesitancy in discussing the subject of
personal control frankly and in dealing with the facts in an
objective way. But it does not excuse such an attitude or practice.
This is only a special case of the general principle that the issue of
personal freedom must not be allowed to interfere with a scientific
analysis of human behavior. As we have seen, science implies
prediction and, insofar as the relevant variables can be controlled,
it implies control. We cannot expect to profit from applying the
methods of science to human behavior if for some extraneous
reason we refuse to admit that our subject matter can be controlled.
The advantage of this general principle is well illustrated by the
present point: those who are most concerned with restricting
personal control have most to gain from a clear understanding of
the techniques employed.

CHAPTER XXI

GROUP CONTROL

The individual is subjected to a more powerful control when
two or more persons manipulate variables having a common effect
upon his behavior. This will happen if two or more persons are moved
to control him in the same way. The condition is usually fulfilled
when the members of a group compete for limited resources. A social
system, in the sense of Chapter XIX, is then established in which one
man's positive reinforcement is another man's negative. In the
expression, "the spoils of war," the reinforcement of the conqueror is
named for its aversive effect upon the conquered. The child who
takes a toy from another is thereby reinforced, but the loss of the toy
is aversive to the other child. The successful suitor inevitably creates
an aversive condition for other suitors.
Since an individual may affect all other members of a group in this
way, their countercontrol may be undertaken in concert. All the
other members become what we may designate as the controlling
group. The group acts as a unit insofar as its members are affected
by the individual in the same way. It need not be highly organized,
but some sort of organization usually develops. Controlling
practices acquire a certain uniformity from the cohesive forces which
lead
323

324

THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS

individuals to take part in group action (Chapter XIX) and from
their mode of transmission from one generation to another.
The principal technique employed in the control of the individual
by any group of people who have lived together for a sufficient
length of time is as follows. The behavior of the individual is
classified as either "good" or "bad" or, to the same effect, "right" or
"wrong" and is reinforced or punished accordingly. We need not
seek far for a definition of these controversial terms. The behavior
of an individual is usually called good or right insofar as it
reinforces other members of the group and bad or wrong insofar as
it is aversive. The actual practices of the group may not be
completely consistent with these definitions. The initial
classification may have been accidental: a conspicuous bit of
behavior which was only adventitiously correlated with reinforcing
or aversive events came to be classed as good or bad accordingly.
Our definition applies literally to the origin of such a superstitious
practice but does not fit any current effect. A classification of
behavior may also continue in force long after it is out of date:
behavior often continues to be branded good or bad although,
through some change in conditions, it is no longer reinforcing or
aversive.
The classification may also be defective because of the faulty
structure of the group. All members may not participate to the
same extent. Since an act may have different effects upon different
members, some of whom may, therefore, classify it as good and
others as bad, subdivisions of the group may conflict with each
other in the direction of their control. For example, the use of
physical force is generally aversive to others and hence called bad,
but it may be classified as good by those who exhibit similar
behavior in controlling a third party, either within or outside the
group. Behavior which is immediately reinforcing may have a
long-term aversive effect. The behavior of seduction or of exerting
"undue influence" is often effective through positive
reinforcement, but the ultimate consequences may lead the victim,
as well as others, to classify it as bad.
The group as a whole seldom draws up a formal classification of
behavior as good or bad. We infer the classification from our
observations of controlling practices. A sort of informal codification
takes place, however, when the terms themselves come to be used
in rein-

GROUP CONTROL

325

forcement. Perhaps the commonest generalized reinforcers are
the verbal stimuli "Good," "Right," "Bad," and "Wrong." These
are used, together with unconditioned and other conditioned
reinforcers such as praise, thanks, caresses, gratuities, favors,
blows, blame, censure, and criticism, to shape the behavior of the
individual.
The actual controlling practices are usually obvious. Good
behavior is reinforced, and bad behavior punished. The
conditioned aversive stimulation generated by bad behavior as
the result of punishment is associated with an emotional pattern
commonly called "shame." The individual responds to this when
he "feels ashamed of himself." Part of what he feels are the
responses of glands and smooth muscles recorded by the socalled lie detector (Chapter X). The relevance of this instrument
to lie detection is based upon the fact that lying is frequently
punished. Another part of the reaction of shame is a conspicuous
change in normal dispositions—the social offender acts in a
shamefaced manner. Any or all of these emotional conditions
may be directly or indirectly aversive, in which case they
combine with other conditioned aversive stimulation in
providing for the reinforcement of behavior which displaces or
otherwise reduces the probability of the punished response. The
best example of such behavior is self-control. The group also
directly reinforces practices of self-control.
WHY THE GROUP EXERTS CONTROL
In explaining any given instance of group control we have to
show how the behavior of the controller is interlocked with that
of the controllee in a social system. We must also show that both
are adequately accounted for by the specified variables. In a
given instance, good behavior on the part of A may be positively
reinforced by B because it generates an emotional disposition on
the part of B to "do good" to A. This explanation is not very
satisfactory because it simply appeals to a standing tendency to
do good. But it seems clear, simply as a matter of observation,
that the behavior of favoring another is modified by appropriate
emotional circumstances and that good behavior on the part of
another is a case in point. The mother rein-

326

THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS

forces her child in a burst of affection when the child's behavior is
especially good or right.
Another possibility is that the group appropriately reinforces good
behavior just because the probability of similar behavior in the future is
thus increased. The gratuity may be given to guarantee similar
service in the future; it then has nothing to do with gratitude as an
emotional disposition to favor others. The community also teaches
each member to thank or praise the individual who has behaved well
and to do so even when the member himself is not directly affected.
An act of heroism is acclaimed by many people who have not, in this
instance, been positively reinforced. The educational practice
generates good behavior in the individual by assuring the proper
reinforcing behavior on the part of the group.
The emotional dispositions which lead the members of a group to
punish bad behavior are, unfortunately, more obvious. Anyone who
injures others, deprives them of property, or interferes with their
behavior generates a heightened inclination toward counterattack.
This statement is again merely an appeal to an observed increase in
the tendency of individuals to act aggressively under certain
circumstances, but there are variables outside the field of emotion
which work in the same direction. If A's aggression is momentarily
reduced through B's counteragression (we have seen, of course, that
the long-term effect is different), B will be reinforced. B's behavior in
punishing A may thus be due simply to operant reinforcement. It is
sometimes argued that an emotional disposition to counterattack is
the basic variable—that we always "strike a child in anger," and that
any interpretation of the behavior as "intellectual" is a mere
rationalization (Chapter XVIII). But the practice could arise in the
absence of an emotional variable; one could punish objectionable
behavior simply to reduce the probability that it will recur.
Educational agencies also encourage the use of punishment to
control bad behavior, and they generate a tendency to exert the
control even though the individual himself is not at the moment
involved. The agency may work through emotional variables—for
example, by generating resentment or indignation with respect to
dishonesty, theft, or murder —or through operant reinforcement by
appeal to the consequences.

GROUP CONTROL

327

THE EFFECT OF GROUP CONTROL
The control exercised by the group works to at least the temporary
disadvantage of the individual. The man who has been positively
reinforced for giving his possessions and services to others may find
himself thoroughly despoiled. The group has generated behavior
which, although it achieves the positive reinforcement accorded good
behavior, also creates strongly aversive conditions for the individual.
Among the forms of good behavior strengthened by the community
are practices of self-control in which behavior which might result in
extensive reinforcement is weakened. That the individual suffers
when bad behavior is punished is more obvious. Punishment itself is
aversive, and behavior which works to the advantage of the individual
at the expense of others is, temporarily at least, suppressed.
Punishment is also the principal variable responsible for the
behavior of self-control, which, as we have just seen, also reduces
primary reinforcement.
In short, the effect of group control is in conflict with the strong
primarily reinforced behavior of the individual. Selfish behavior is
restrained, and altruism encouraged. But the individual gains from
these practices because he is part of the controlling group with
respect to every other individual. He may be subject to control, but he
engages in similar practices in controlling the behavior of others.
Such a system may reach a "steady state" in which the individual's
advantages and disadvantages strike some sort of balance. In such a
state a reasonable control over the selfish behavior of the individual
is matched by the advantages which he gains as a member of a group
which controls the same selfish behavior in others.
The power of the group is, of course, great. Even the political
tyrant, the despotic father, the bully in the street gang, or any other
exceptionally strong individual usually yields eventually to the group
as a whole. The less talented may be wholly submerged by it. In
discussing psychotherapy in Chapter XXIV we shall consider some of
the consequences of excessive control. Fortunately, the group seldom
acts efficiently enough to press its advantage to the limit, and its
full power is probably never felt. Classifications of behavior as
"good,"

328

THE BEHAVIOR OF PEOPLE IN GROUPS

"bad," "right," or "wrong" are seldom clear-cut. And they are not
consistently supported by all members of a group. Certain organized
subdivisions of the group, however, may make better use of their
power, as we shall see in Section V.
JUSTIFICATION OF GROUP CONTROL
Certain familiar questions in the field of ethics may have occurred to
the reader. What do we mean by the Good? How may we encourage
people to practice the Good Life? And so on. Our account does not
answer questions of this sort in the spirit in which they are usually
asked. Within the framework of a natural science certain kinds of
behavior are observed when people live together in groups—kinds of
behavior which are directed toward the control of the individual and
which operate for the advantage of other members of the group. We
define "good" and "bad," or "right" and "wrong," with respect to a
particular set of practices. We account for the practices by noting the
effects which they have upon the individual and in turn upon the
members of the group, according to the basic processes of behavior.
Ethics is usually concerned with justifying controlling practices
rather than with merely describing them. Why is a particular bit of
behavior classed as good or bad? The question is sometimes answered
by asserting that "good" and "bad" have been defined by supernatural
authorities. Although a science of behavior might help in designing
educational practices which would encourage people to be good and
dissuade them from being bad according to a given authority, it can
scarcely pass upon the validity of such a definition. When it can be
shown that a classification leads to results which are positively
reinforcing to the individual who reveals the word of authority,
another sort of explanation is available. Such an explanation need not
question the ultimate, possibly beneficial, effect of a classification.
Attempts have been made to avoid an appeal to authority by finding
other bases for a definition. It has been argued that a particular form
of individual behavior, or the controlling practice which produces it,
is to be recommended if it can be shown to work for the "greatest
good of the greatest number," to increase the "sum total of human
happiness," to maintain the "equilibrium" of a group, and

GROUP CONTROL

329

so on. The original problem remains, however, because we still have
to justify the criteria. Why do we choose the greatest good or the
sum total of human happiness or equilibrium as a basis for a
definition? A science of behavior might be able to specify behavior
which would or would not make for happiness, but the question
remains whether it can decide that happiness is "best" in the ethical
sense. Here again we may be able to show that practices which are
justified in terms of happiness have consequences which are
reinforcing to the proponents of such a justification. It is their
happiness which is primarily affected. But this is also irrelevant to
the ultimate effect of the classification.
Such a criterion as the "greatest good of the greatest number"
represents a type of explanation, based upon the principle of maxima
and minima, which has often proved useful in the physical sciences.
In the field of behavior, however, the definition of what is being
maximized or minimized is unsatisfactory—as we might suspect from
the enormous amount of discussion which terms like "the greatest
good" have provoked. Even if these terms could be defined, the
practice of characterizing a controlling practice as maximizing or
minimizing some such entity is very different from an analysis in terms
of relevant variables. It is not impossible that the two could be shown
to be compatible if physical dimensions could be assigned to the thing
maximized, but this has not been done in the traditional study of
ethics. The program of a functional analysis offers a course of action
in which the problem of the definition of such entities may be
avoided.
Obviously an important feature of any group is the extent to which it
exercises control over each of its members. We shall return in
Section VI to the question of whether a science of human behavior
provides any basis for determining the most expedient extent of such
control. This problem is quite independent of an analysis of actual
controlling practices.

SECTION

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

V

CHAPTER

XXII

GOVERNMENT AND LAW

The group exercises an ethical control over each of its
members mainly through its power to reinforce or punish. The
power is derived from sheer number and from the importance of
other people in the life of each member. Usually the group is not
well organized, nor are its practices consistently sustained. Within
the group, however, certain controlling agencies manipulate
particular sets of variables. These agencies are usually better
organized than is the group as a whole, and they often operate with
greater success.
The agencies to be considered in this section are chosen from the
fields of government, religion, psychotherapy, economics, and
education. These are very broad areas, of course, which cannot be
adequately treated here. Fortunately, for our present purposes we do
not need an exhaustive account of the historical and comparative
facts about particular religions, governments, economic systems,
and so on. We are concerned only with the conceptions of the
behaving individual which are encountered in these fields.
Theology usually has much to say of man in his relation to the
universe. Theories of government frequently describe man as a
political animal or as a responsible agent under the law.
Psychotherapy is particularly rich
333

334

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

in "systems" of human behavior, and "economic man" has figured
prominently in economic theory. A special psychology has been
developed in the field of education.
These theories of human behavior are seldom, if ever, satisfactory
even in their appropriate fields, and a broader objection may be
urged against them. Each conception is based upon a particular set
of facts and is developed and used primarily to explain these facts
alone. The conception developed in one field is seldom applied,
and never effectively applied, to another. What the political
scientist has to say about man proves to be of little value to the
psychotherapist, while the individual who emerges from educational
psychology bears no familial resemblance to economic man. It is
not likely that the human organism is compartmentalized in this
way. We might arrive at a formulation of behavior which could be
applied to any field by considering all the historical and
comparative facts at once. There is a simpler way, however. Our
conception of human behavior need not be deduced from the
complex facts which it must eventually explain. We are not
required, for example, to discover the characteristics of the
political animal through a study of the facts of government. If the
political animal is man himself, we may study him elsewhere and
often under better conditions. A functional analysis of behavior
provides us with a basic conception with which we may approach
each of these fields in turn. We may be interested primarily in
testing such an analysis by discovering whether it yields a plausible
account of the behavior of the individual in each case, but if we can
achieve such an account, then a considerable advantage may be
claimed over traditional formulations. Not only will our analysis in
each case have the support of the scientific study of the individual
under optimal conditions of observation, it will be common to all
fields. It will then be possible to consider the effect upon the
individual of the total culture, in which all our controlling agencies
and all the other features of the social environment work together
simultaneously and with a single effect.
In discussing controlling agencies we are concerned specifically
with certain kinds of power over variables which affect human
behavior and with the controlling practices which can be employed

GOVERNMENT AND LAW

335

because of this power. Possibilities which are as yet unrealized
may be as important as the practices of which history has already
provided examples. A controlling agency, together with the
individuals who are controlled by it, comprises a social system in the
sense of Chapter XIX, and our task is to account for the behavior of
all participants. We must identify the individuals composing the
agency and explain why they have the power to manipulate the
variables which the agency employs. We must also analyze the
general effect on the controllee, and show how this leads to a return
reinforcement which explains the continuing existence of the
agency. All the preceding analysis is needed in doing this. The
classification of controlling variables, the study of basic processes,
and the analysis of complex arrangements of variables and of the
interaction of two or more individuals in a social system are all
indispensable.
THE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY
Perhaps the most obvious type of agency engaged in the control
of human behavior is government. Traditional studies in political
science deal with the history and properties of actual governments,
with various types of governmental structure, and with the theories
and principles which have been offered to justify governmental
practices. We shall be concerned here principally with the
behavioral processes through which a government exercises
control. We have to examine the resulting behavior of the governed
and the effect of this behavior which explains why the agency
continues to control.
Narrowly defined, government is the use of the power to punish.
Although this definition is sometimes offered as exhaustive,
governmental agencies often resort to other kinds of control. The
source of the power to punish determines the composition of the
agency in the stricter sense. The strong or clever man is a sort of
personal government whose power derives from his strength or
skill. He may acquire henchmen who exercise the actual control
over the group but who are in turn controlled by him through
personal strength or skill. The underworld gang often shows a
governmental structure of this sort. In the organized government of a
modern state the specific task of punishment is assigned to special
groups—the police and military. Their

336

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

power is usually sheer physical force, amplified by special equipment,
but the power of the ultimate governmental agency may be of a
different nature. For example, the police and military may be
recruited after appropriate education, they may be controlled through
economic measures, or they may act under religious pressure.
Power which is derived from the "consent of the governed" also
determines the composition of the appropriate agency. To say that
power is "delegated" does not describe the actual process. An
adequate analysis of such a government would include a study of
the techniques used by the individual in becoming a member of the
agency and in maintaining himself as such. This is roughly the field
of practical politics. The individual must induce the group to assign
governmental power to him, and once in office he must maintain his
connection with this source. The techniques employed by an
individual will be similar to those of a political machine or party.
In the long run the power of a government which has the consent
of the governed derives from a congruence of function between
governmental and ethical control (Chapter XXI). If the police or
military are controlled through economic means, the group supplies the
necessary money through taxation. Members of the group may
volunteer or be conscripted to serve in the police or military. Since
religious control often derives support from the same source (Chapter
XXIII), it is not unusual to find a considerable overlap in the
composition of religious and governmental agencies. Once an agency
with a particular membership is in power, however, it may insure its
own support through the use of the power to punish rather than
through appeal to the congruence of its function with that of the
ethical group. Not everyone pays taxes simply because of group
pressure. We are not concerned here, however, with the various kinds
of ultimate power in government or with the internal control which
maintains the structure of the agency or makes it function
smoothly. The effect upon the governed is the point at issue.
TECHNIQUES IN GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL
Where the group classifies behavior as "right" or "wrong" for
purposes of ethical reinforcement, the governing agency adopts a
dis-

GOVERNMENT AND LAW

337

tinction between "legal" and "illegal." The terms are denned
roughly in relation to the source of power of the agency. Under an
absolute ruler behavior is illegal if it has aversive consequences for
the agency. To the extent that the power of the government derives
from the group, the definitions approach those of "right" and
"wrong." Since the governmental agency operates principally
through the power to punish, however, the emphasis is upon
"wrong." A government uses its power to "keep the peace"—to
restrain behavior which threatens the property and persons of
other members of the group. A government which possesses only
the power to punish can strengthen legal behavior only by making
the removal of a threat of punishment contingent upon it. This is
sometimes done, but the commoner technique is simply to punish
illegal forms of behavior.
Some governmental punishments consist of removing positive
reinforcers—for example, dispossessing a man of property, fining
him, taxing him punitively, or depriving him of contact with
society through incarceration or banishment. Other common
punishments consist of presenting negative reinforcers—for
example, inflicting physical injury as in flogging, threatening
injury or death, imposing a sentence at hard labor, exposing the
individual to public ridicule in the stocks, and aversively
stimulating the individual in minor ways as by requiring him to
report in person to a police station where the principal punishment
is simply the time and labor consumed in reporting. In practice,
these punishments are made contingent upon particular kinds of
behavior in order to reduce the probability that the behavior will
occur again. A direct weakening as the opposite effect of
reinforcement is, as we have seen, unlikely. Instead, conditioned
aversive stimuli are produced, one effect of which resembles the
"sense of shame" of group control. When this results from
governmental punishment, the commoner term is "guilt." The
process provides for the automatic reinforcement of responses
which are incompatible with illegal behavior. As the net effect of
governmental control, then, illegal behavior comes to generate
aversive stimuli which make the individual "feel guilty" and which
provide for the automatic positive reinforcement of behaving
legally.
A controlling technique usually associated with an emphasis
upon

338

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

punishment is the establishment of obedient behavior. This is often a
characteristic of personal control—for example, in the relation
between parent and child. It is seen as a by-product of auxiliary
techniques in the field of education when the pupil is taught
obedience to his teacher. It is a staple product of governmental
control. In the broadest sense the controlled individual is obedient
to the dictates of the agency if he behaves in conformity with its
controlling practices, but there is a special form of obedience in
which a particular response is brought under the control of a verbal
command. As a verbal stimulus a command serves a double
function. It specifies behavior to be carried out, and it generates an
aversive condition from which only that behavior will bring escape.
The command is, of course, a familiar feature of military training. A
selected repertoire of responses is brought under the control of
appropriate verbal stimuli, which may then be used to time or
otherwise coordinate the behavior of the members of a group. The
civilian shows a comparable repertoire when he obeys traffic signals
or a traffic policeman. But obedience to the government is more than
a selected repertoire. Any behavior commanded by the government—
in actual fact by "persons in authority" who are able to exert
governmental control—is eventually carried out within the range of
the verbal history of the individual. The group exercises a control of
this sort to the extent that the imperative mood prevails in everyday
discourse. By establishing obedient behavior, the controlling agency
prepares for future occasions which it cannot otherwise foresee and
for which an explicit repertoire cannot, therefore, be prepared in
advance. When novel occasions arise to which the individual
possesses no response, he simply does as he is told.
LAW
An important point in the development of a governmental agency is
the codification of its controlling practices. The study of law or
jurisprudence is usually concerned with the codes and practices of
specific governments, past or present. It is also concerned with certain
questions upon which a functional analysis of behavior has some
bearing. What is a law? What role does a law play in governmental
control?

GOVERNMENT AND LAW

339

In particular, what effect does it have upon the behavior of the
controllee and of the members of the governmental agency itself?
A law usually has two important features. In the first place, it
specifies behavior. The behavior is usually not described
topographically but rather in terms of its effect upon others—the
effect which is the object of governmental control. When we are
told, for example, that an individual has "committed perjury," we
are not told what he has actually said. "Robbery" and "assault" do
not refer to specific forms of response. Only properties of behavior
which are aversive to others are mentioned—in perjury the lack of
a customary correspondence between a verbal response and certain
factual circumstances, in robbery the removal of positive
reinforcers, and in assault the aversive character of physical injury.
In the second place, a law specifies or implies a consequence,
usually punishment. A law is thus a statement of a contingency of
reinforcement maintained by a governmental agency. The
contingency may have prevailed as a controlling practice prior to
its codification as a law, or it may represent a new practice which
goes into effect with the passage of the law. Laws are thus both
descriptions of past practices and assurances of similar practices in
the future. A law is a rule of conduct in the sense that it specifies
the consequences of certain actions which in turn "rule" behavior.
The effect of a law upon the controllee. To show how the
individual actually comes to abide by a code, we should have to
analyze how he learns not to lie, not to steal, not to assault others,
and so on. The governmental agency may codify its controlling
practices and maintain the contingencies thus set forth, but it
seldom attempts to make the code effective in any other way. The
individual is directly affected by only a small fraction of prevailing
contingencies. In asserting that "ignorance of the law is no
excuse," the governmental agency leaves the actual conditioning of
the individual to others. Parents and friends establish minor
contingencies which keep behavior within legal bounds, and the
governmental function may also be actively supported by the ethical
group and by religious and educational institutions with their
appropriate techniques.
The governmental agency often conceals its neglect of this
important step in control by claiming to have an educational
effect. The

340

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

individual is said to be affected by witnessing the punishment of
others. But the effect of punishment as a deterrent to those who are
not themselves punished is neither simple nor inevitable. The question
is not peculiar to governmental contingencies. A boy may see a
companion fall from a tree and may then see that the companion
behaves in a manner characteristic of strong aversive stimulation.
Through at least two stages of respondent conditioning any
subsequent move on the part of the boy himself to climb trees
generates conditioned aversive stimulation, a reduction in which
reinforces competing behavior. The process is the same, although the
effect is not of the same magnitude, as when the boy himself falls and
is hurt. The same aversive stimulation—from trees and from boys in
trees-explains why the boy may stop others who start to climb trees
and why he may call climbing trees "wrong" or "bad." In the same
way a man who has observed illegal behavior and the punishment
contingent upon it may act to keep himself from such behavior and
to prevent others from behaving in the same way. In doing so, he
supports governmental control. But it is rare that an individual
witnesses both the behavior and the punishment of another person.
The effect of the contingency expressed in a law is usually mediated by
complex verbal processes, which cannot be fully analyzed here. The
law itself is a verbal device, and it is in furthering these intermediate
processes that codification of governmental practices helps most. A
code supports the verbal behavior which bridges the gap between
instances of punishment and the behavior of others. Nevertheless, it
is only a slight step toward a recognition of the behavioral processes
through which governmental control is usually exerted.
The effect of a law upon the controlling agency. The government
of a large group requires an elaborate organization, the practices of
which may be made more consistent and effective by codification.
How codes of law affect governmental agents is the principal subject
of jurisprudence. The behavioral processes are complex, although
presumably not novel. In order to maintain or "enforce"
contingencies of governmental control, an agency must establish the
fact that an individual has behaved illegally and must interpret a
code to determine the punishment. It must then carry out the
punishment. These

GOVERNMENT AND LAW

341

labors are usually divided among special subdivisions of the
agency. The advantages gained when the individual is "not under
man but under law" have usually been obvious, and the great
codifiers of law occupy places of honor in the history of civilization.
Codification does not, however, change the essential nature of
governmental action nor remedy all its defects.
TRADITIONAL INTERPRETATIONS
Until fairly recently it was customary to accept a mode of
government, and the law which embodied it, as derived from
unquestionable authority and permanently fixed. In the Divine Law
of the Middle Ages, "legal" and "illegal" were held to be immutable
classifications laid down by absolute decree. Such a view was
strengthened by the absence of historical and comparative facts
regarding other governmental and legal practices, and it was
probably to some extent encouraged by the very codification of
law. But the inevitable consequence was that any analysis of
human behavior had to adjust itself to a particular set of
established practices. Behavior had to be accepted, not for what it
was observed to be, but for what it was decreed to be. If there was
any discrepancy between the two, conformity to the decree prevailed.
The modern view, which is of surprisingly recent date, accepts
the fact that government and law depend upon the circumstances
of a given culture or epoch. It recognizes the fact that there is an
English law, a French law, a Chinese law, a law of the sixteenth
century, a law of the twentieth century, and so on. The modern
lawmaker and the modern jurist are more likely to interpret
governmental and legal practices in terms of their current effects
upon the individual and the state. As a result of this change the
observation of human behavior is no longer bound by authoritarian
pronouncements, and a scientific study is under no obligation to
justify a given set of practices. There remains, however, a great
discrepancy between legal and scientific conceptions of human
behavior.
In the tradition which led to modern English and American law,
man was regarded as a "responsible" creature, who was born with
or quickly acquired a "knowledge of right and wrong." He was
held to

342

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

be "accountable" for his actions, and if he violated a law, it was
considered just that he be punished. Punishment was explained in
different ways, depending upon the source of power of the
government. When the power was derived from the strength of the
governor or was asserted to be of divine or other absolute origin, a
crime was regarded as an offense against the state. Punishment of
the offender "vindicated" the state. This interpretation appears to be
a rationalization of emotional dispositions on the part of governors
to act aggressively toward those who "disturb the peace" or
otherwise threaten their power. When the power was derived, at
least in part, from the governed, the state was said to act in the
interest of the more immediately aggrieved. Its function was then
to "even a score," and the problem of penology was to make the
punishment fit the crime. Justice had been done when the aversive
stimulation received by the criminal precisely matched that of the
aggrieved member of the group: an eye for an eye and a tooth for a
tooth. This interpretation also seems to be related to an emotional
tendency to take revenge.
Another interpretation of punishment appeals to constructive
behavioral processes: It is said that a man is punished so that he
will be less likely to misbehave in the future and so that others will
be deterred from similar misbehavior. This effect may have
nothing to do with emotional dispositions on the part of an
offended ruler or an aggrieved citizen. At the same time, it is not
appropriate to a conception of man as a responsible free agent with
a knowledge of right and wrong. The difficulty is currently evident
in conflicting theories of penology. It is now generally recognized
that punishment is ineffective simply as a means of making behavior
less probable. To take advantage of a better understanding of the
process requires a change of practice, but this is difficult in the face
of traditional views of human nature which presuppose another
result. We may restate governmental and legal practices, however,
in a way which is consistent with the behavioral processes involved
in punishment.
As we saw in Chapter VII, operant behavior is closely associated
with "volition." A "deliberate act," undertaken to obtain a "desired
end," is an operant. The traditional way of describing it is
unfortunate because it emphasizes a future event which can have no
contemporary

GOVERNMENT AND LAW

343

effect. It is necessary to endow the individual with a "knowledge
of consequences" or some sort of "expectation" to bridge the gap
between the past and the future. But we are always dealing with a
prior history of reinforcement and punishment. The practices of
government and law are clearly designed to construct or
supplement such histories, and we can describe the individual who
has come under governmental control wholly in such terms. The
"reasons" or "grounds" for an "end-seeking action" are simply
some of the variables of which behavior is a function.
"Deliberation" and "desire" are others. A history of punishment is
still another. To say that a person is "held responsible" for an act is
simply to say that he is usually punished for it.
The question of the death penalty for murder supplies an
example of the necessary change in interpretation. There is little
doubt that death is an effective way of reducing a probability of
response, but if capital punishment is simply a way of removing a
dangerous individual from society, it has only an economic
advantage over life imprisonment, which might be preferred for
other reasons. Whether the execution of a murderer is a deterrent to
others could presumably be decided with available techniques. It
has often been pointed out that when pickpockets were hanged
publicly, the crowds which gathered to witness the hangings
proved to be easy marks for pickpockets, although it is difficult to
conceive of circumstances under which the death penalty should
be a more effective deterrent. Any decision concerning capital
punishment appears to be a practical one, involving the weighing
of advantages and disadvantages to society. But if the decision is to
eliminate the death penalty, it may be opposed by those to whom
punishment is a form of retribution and who may argue that in
order to "equal the score" or "maximize justice" one who has killed
must be killed.
A similar conflict arises in other forms of punishment. Is
imprisonment a form of aversive stimulation or an opportunity to
re-educate the individual? The fixing in advance of a given period
of imprisonment presupposes the former, since the time needed for
re-education is not necessarily closely related to the nature of a
crime or to its magnitude. Any attempt to adopt practices which
presuppose the

344

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

latter may be opposed by those to whom punishment is a form of
revenge.
The same transitional stage is evident in other discussions of
responsibility. In current practice a murderer who is judged insane
does not receive the death penalty; he is merely incarcerated to
prevent further criminal behavior. The traditional view is that since
he is not "responsible," it is not "just" that he be killed. But the same
practice may be defended more consistently in terms of
controllability. We cannot deter the insane or correct their behavior
because they are by definition out of control. Physical restraint is
the only available technique and may be frankly adopted for this
reason. Lesser degrees of "irresponsibility" prove upon analysis to be
simply lesser degrees of "uncontrollability." When it can be
demonstrated by adequate testimony that a man is incapable of
changing his conduct as the result of repeated legal punishment, he
is permanently incarcerated. We do not commonly regard this as
retribution; incarceration is required because other governmental
techniques have failed. Sometimes psychotherapy, rather than legal
punishment, is recognized as appropriate.
The responsibility of even the normal or legally sane citizen is
acknowledged to have certain limits. This is again the question of the
effectiveness of governmental controls. Illegal behavior is sometimes
not punished, or is punished less severely, because it is committed in
"the heat of passion," or in obeying an "irresistible impulse," or
"under extenuating circumstances." In the traditional view the
individual is not held responsible for his actions under such
circumstances. In the present terms we may simply say that certain
techniques of governmental control are recognized to be ineffective
in competition with strong emotional or motivational variables.
There is no point in attempting to apply governmental control,
other than incarceration, to the behavior to which these variables
lead. When such circumstances are not likely to occur frequently, the
individual is permitted to remain at large. A philosophy of
retribution, on the other hand, would still demand that justice be
done.

GOVERNMENT AND LAW

345

OTHER TYPES OF GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL
It is not only the weight of tradition which is responsible for
current inconsistencies in our philosophies of government and law.
The ultimate weakness of punishment as a technique of control has
been known for a long time. Unfortunately, alternative techniques
require a different kind of governmental power and a better
understanding of human behavior. Ethical control by the group has
moved only very slowly from coercive techniques, in which the
individual is forced to behave in conformity with the interests of
others, to techniques in which "good" is more important than "bad."
Religious agencies have, as we shall see, moved only slowly from an
emphasis upon the punishments of Hell and the anger of jealous
gods to the positive inducements of Heaven or the present
satisfactions of the good life. Since governmental agencies have been
particularly committed to the use of punishment, the change to other
forms of control has been especially slow.
Modern governments, however, have it in their power to use other
techniques and do so extensively. If wealth is accumulated—through
taxation, for example—economic control is then available (Chapter
XXV). This is used as a form of positive reinforcement in subsidies
and bonuses. The citizen is thus induced to act legally rather than
deterred from acting illegally. Although it is theoretically possible to
control agricultural production through punishment by making the
cultivation of certain crops illegal, a government with economic
power achieves the same effect through positive reinforcement with
subsidies. The educational control of legal behavior is another
alternative technique. Where it is theoretically possible to induce a
soldier to fight entirely through coercion—by arranging matters so
that he must fight or be still more severely punished than in battle—a
modern government is likely to generate an inclination to fight
through educational devices. Variables in the fields of respondent
conditioning, motivation, and emotion are arranged to increase a
disposition to fight. These practices lead eventually to far more
effective behavior than coercion. Unfortunately, educational
techniques in the field of government are represented most
conspicuously by propaganda,

346

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

where variables are manipulated for an effect which is concealed or
disguised, often in a way which is aversive to many people. But
education may be effective even when the result is clearly indicated.
Similar alternative techniques are available in preventing illegal
behavior, but the processes are more complicated and are not yet
well explored. A start has been made at the level of minor offenses.
Motorists are usually induced to obey traffic signals by a familiar
process. A certain percentage of those who go through stop signs, for
example, are punished. An alternative procedure which has been tried
successfully is to commend or otherwise reinforce motorists who
obey signs. This is clearly not an adequate technique for all drivers,
but it has a measurable effect upon many who might otherwise be
only partially controlled by traffic signals. Educational programs
which point up the contingencies between reckless driving and its
consequences—injury or death—should in the long run be more
effective than a program of arrests and fines.
When a governmental agency turns to auxiliary techniques which
are not based upon punishment, the concept of man as a
"responsible agent" falls into disuse. This is additional proof that the
concept serves merely to rationalize the use of punishment as a
technique of control.
COUNTERCONTROL OF
GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES
Government and governed compose a social system in the sense of
Chapter XIX. The questions which have just been raised concern the
reciprocal interchange between the participants. The government
manipulates variables which alter the behavior of the governed and is
defined in terms of its power to do so. The change in the behavior
of the governed supplies a return reinforcement to the government
which explains its continuing function. A given system may be as
simple as a strong man taking property from the weaker members of a
group or as complex as a modern government embarking upon an
educational program which will generate the skilled manpower it
needs.
Such a system is inherently unstable, again in the sense of Chapter

GOVERNMENT AND LAW

347

XIX, since the power of the agency increases with each interchange.
In fact, the growth of power accelerates as control becomes more and
more effective. Other things being equal, governments grow stronger
in the act of governing. When the strong man coerces others to
engage in control in his interest, his total power is increased. When a
government uses force to acquire wealth, it can then also exercise
economic control.
The process cannot go on indefinitely, however. One limit, which
arises within the system itself, is the simple exhaustion of the
resources of the governed. This is exemplified in the ultimate failure
of the tyrannical exploitation of a people. Excessive control also
generates behavior on the part of the controllee in the form of escape,
revolt, or passive resistance, as we shall see in Chapter XXIV. Other
limits may be imposed from outside the system through competition
with other would-be governing agencies.
The codification of controlling practices often has the effect of
stabilizing the system. In stating a contingency between behavior
and punishment, for example, a law imposes a restriction upon the
governing agency. The social system of government and governed
cannot deteriorate appreciably unless the law is changed. A more
explicit countercontrol is represented by a constitution, in which a
government which derives its power from the consent of the
governed is constrained to use that power within specified areas. A
constitution may specify the composition of the governing agency,
the channels through which it receives its power, and the
procedures according to which laws are to be made, interpreted, and
enforced. With these specifications the system is prevented from
deteriorating through an asymmetrical interchange.
A nation which has been completely defeated in warfare may, for a
time at least, be governed by its conquerors. No constitution specifies
the kinds or limits of power to be wielded. So far as immediate
power is concerned, there is nothing to prevent the mass slaughter of
the whole population, a practice of which history supplies many
examples. But even when governmental power is not derived from the
consent of the governed, it is now recognized that a government is
not strengthened by excessive exploitation of a people. Mass murder

348

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

is obviously not an effective way to use the human resources of the
conquered country. The practice also generates extreme measures of
countercontrol on the part of other countries in danger of a similar
fate, and it plunges the government into serious trouble in controlling
its own citizens.
We shall consider other undesirable by-products of excessive control
in Chapter XXIV.
JUSTIFICATION OF
GOVERNMENTAL PRACTICES
Governments have traditionally been evaluated in terms of their
effects in promoting several principles. We have seen that one of
these—justice—is appropriate to the narrower definition of
government as the power to punish. It is punishment which is
administered with justice, and a government which is successful in
balancing aversive consequences is said to "maximize justice." Our
practical support of such a government is probably not due to any
such principle, however, but rather to the fact that a just government,
in comparison with other governments, is more likely to reinforce
the behavior of supporting it.
Another principle commonly appealed to is freedom. That
government is said to be best which governs least. The freedom which
is maximized by a good government is not, however, the freedom
which is at issue in a science of behavior. Under a government which
controls through positive reinforcement the citizen feels free,
though he is no less controlled. Freedom from government is
freedom from aversive consequences. We choose a form of government
which maximizes freedom for a very simple reason: aversive events are
aversive. A government which makes the least use of its power to
punish is most likely to reinforce our behavior in supporting it.
Another principle currently in fashion is security. Security against
aversive governmental control raises the same issue as freedom. So
does security from want, which means security from aversive events
which are not specifically arranged by the governing agency—from
hunger, cold, or hardship in general, particularly in illness or old age.
A government increases security by arranging an environment in

GOVERNMENT AND LAW

349

which many common aversive consequences do not occur, in
which positive consequences are easily achieved, and in which
extreme states of deprivation are avoided. Such a government
naturally reinforces the behavior of supporting it.
The "right" of a ruler was an ancient device for explaining his
power to rule. "Human rights" such as justice, freedom, and
security are devices for explaining the countercontrol exercised by
the governed. A man has his rights in the sense that the governing
agency is restricted in its power to control him. He asserts these
rights along with other citizens when he resists control. "Human
rights" are ways of representing certain effects of governing
practices—effects which are in general positively reinforcing and
which we therefore call good. To "justify" a government in such
terms is simply an indirect way of pointing to the effect of the
government in reinforcing the behavior of the supporting group.
It is commonly believed that justice, freedom, security, and so on
refer to certain more remote consequences in terms of which a
form of government may be evaluated. We shall return to this
point in Section VI, where we shall see that an additional principle
is needed to explain why these principles are chosen as a basis for
evaluation.

CHAPTER XXIII

RELIGION

We have no reason to be disturbed by the fact that the
basic practice through which an efficient government "keeps the
peace" is exemplified under far less admirable circumstances in the
use which the bully or gangster makes of his power to punish. It is
not the technique of control but the ultimate effect upon the group
which leads us to approve or disapprove of any practice. There is a
similar discrepancy between the kinds of uses to which the basic
technique of religious control may be put. The place of religion in
modern life cannot be clearly understood without considering
certain processes which are employed outside the field of religion
proper for very different purposes.
Usually such terms as "superstition" and "magic" are aversive
because they are commonly associated with exploitation for selfish
purposes or with ineffective or poorly organized behavior. There is,
however, no absolute distinction between a superstitious and a nonsuperstitious response. In respondent conditioning we saw that a
single pairing of stimuli could result in a conditioned reflex. A neutral
stimulus which has merely happened to accompany a fearful event
may subsequently evoke an emotional response, and the effect may
survive for a long time in spite of repeated presentations of the
350

RELIGION

351

neutral stimulus alone. In operant behavior a single instance of a
response which is followed by a reinforcing event may be
strengthening, and the effect may survive for a long time even
though the same consequence never occurs again. Verbal behavior
is especially likely to show this sort of "magic" because of the lack
of a mechanical connection between response and reinforcement.
The child acquires an elaborate verbal repertoire which produces
certain effects. Through the process of induction he also exhibits
verbal responses which cannot have more than an occasional
"accidental" effect. Having successfully told people to stop, he may
cry "Stop!" to a ball rolling out of reach. Though we may prove that
his response can have no effect upon the ball, it is in the nature of
the behavioral process that the response nevertheless acquires
strength. As we have already seen, the tendency to behave
superstitiously necessarily increases as the individual comes to be
more sensitively affected by single contingencies. Between the
contingency which is observed only once in the life of the
individual and the contingency which is inevitably observed there
is a continuum which we cannot divide sharply at any point to
distinguish between "superstition" and "fact."
A prototype of religious control arises when rare or accidental
contingencies are used in controlling the behavior of others. For
example, we may "blame" someone for an unfortunate event which
was not actually the result of his behavior, although the temporal
relation was such that a contingency can be asserted. "If you hadn't
dawdled so, we should have started earlier, and the accident never
would have happened." We blame him in order to alter his future
behavior—to make him less likely to dawdle, and we achieve this
by converting an unrelated event into an effective punishing
consequence through certain verbal processes. We use the event as
a punishment, even though we did not actually arrange the
contingency. It is only a short step to claiming the ability to
arrange such contingencies. This is the underlying principle of
witchcraft. Unless the controllee behaves according to command,
the controller will bring bad luck to him. The threat to do so may
be as powerful as the infliction of comparable physical punishment.
We also affect the behavior of others by using accidental
reinforc-

352

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

ing consequences of a positive sort. "You see, if you hadn't
followed my advice, you would have missed this pleasant
surprise." It is only a short step to the claim to be able to mediate
future positive reinforcements—to be able to "bring good luck."
The claim may be used to induce another person to grant favors, to
pay money, and so on. Thus, to sell a spurious device for locating
water underground it is only necessary to establish the claim that
by using the device the well-digger will be reinforced by finding
water. Good-luck charms have economic value when their power to
mediate positive reinforcement is made convincing to the buyer.
Perhaps it is a far cry from these selfish practices to those of the
organized religious agency, but the same techniques appear to be
exemplified. The control which defines a religious agency in the
narrowest possible sense derives from a claimed connection with
the supernatural, through which the agency arranges or alters
certain contingencies involving good or bad luck in the immediate
future or eternal blessedness or damnation in the life to come. Such
a controlling agency is composed of those who are able to establish
their claim to the power to intervene supernaturally. The agency
may consist of a single individual, such as the tribal medicine man,
who resorts to demonstrations of magic to prove his power to
bring good luck or bad, or of a well-organized church with
documented proof that the power to intervene in the arrangement
of reinforcing contingencies has been vested in it by supernatural
authority. We are concerned here, not with the actual structure of
the agency nor with the internal techniques of control which make
it an effective instrument, but with the practices through which it
controls the members of the group.
TECHNIQUES OF RELIGIOUS CONTROL
The principal technique is an extension of group and
governmental control. Behavior is classified, not simply as "good"
and "bad" or "legal" and "illegal," but as "moral" and "immoral" or
"virtuous" and "sinful." It is then reinforced or punished
accordingly. Traditional descriptions of Heaven and Hell epitomize
positive and nega-

RELIGION

353

tive reinforcement. The features vary from culture to culture, but it
is doubtful whether any well-known positive or negative reinforcer
has not been used. To a primitive people who depend upon forest
and field for their food, Heaven is a happy hunting ground. To a
poverty-stricken people primarily concerned with the source of the
next meal, it is a perpetual fish fry. To the unhappy it is relief from
pain and sorrow or a reunion with departed friends and loved ones.
Hell, on the other hand, is an assemblage of aversive stimuli,
which has often been imaginatively portrayed. In Dante's Inferno,
for example, we find most of the negative reinforcers characteristic
of social and nonsocial environments. Only the electric shock of
the psychological laboratory is missing.
The reinforcers portrayed in Heaven and Hell are far more
powerful than those which support the "good" and "bad" of the
ethical group or the "legal" and "illegal" of governmental control,
but this advantage is offset to some extent by the fact that they do
not actually operate in the lifetime of the individual. The power
achieved by the religious agency depends upon how effectively
certain verbal reinforcements are conditioned—in particular the
promise of Heaven and the threat of Hell. Religious education
contributes to this power by pairing these terms with various
conditioned and unconditioned reinforcers which are essentially
those available to the ethical group and to governmental agencies.
The relation between the agency and the communicant, or between
God and man, is often made more effective by being characterized
as such a familiar mundane relation as that between a father and
his sons, a king and his subjects, or a military commander and his
men—where again the primary reinforcing contingencies do not
differ greatly from those used in ethical and governmental control.
In actual practice a threat to bar from Heaven or to consign to
Hell is made contingent upon sinful behavior, while virtuous
behavior brings a promise of Heaven or a release from the threat of
Hell. The last is a particularly powerful technique. The agency
punishes sinful behavior in such a way that it automatically
generates an aversive condition which the individual describes as a
"sense of sin." The agency then provides escape from this aversive
condition through

354

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

expiation or absolution and is thus able to supply a powerful
reinforcement for pious behavior.
Other techniques are, of course, encountered in religious control.
Insofar as the agency controls other variables, it can use other
processes. It may acquire wealth and operate eventually through
economic control (Chapter XXV). It may train and support teachers to
achieve educational control (Chapter XXVI). It may utilize ethical or
governmental techniques in addition to those within its own sphere
(Chapters XXI and XXII). This is especially likely when its
controlling practices coincide with those of the group as a whole. In
short, all the techniques described under self-control in Chapter XV
and under personal control in Chapter XX are available to the agency
possessing the necessary power.
The use of physical restraint by a religious agency is exemplified by
actual incarceration, as in the treatment of women in Moslem
countries. Relevant environmental conditions are manipulated when
the stimuli which elicit or set the occasion for sinful behavior are
weakened or removed and when the stimuli which elicit or serve as
the occasion for virtuous behavior are pointed up. Suggested regimens
of simple fare, unseductive clothing, limited personal contact, and the
other features of the cloister or the "sheltered life" follow this
pattern. Religious agencies are likely to favor censorship of
movies, plays, and books, the enforcement of laws governing
modesty of dress, the prohibition of the sale of alcoholic beverages,
and so on, because these measures reduce occasions for sinful
behavior. Satiation and deprivation also are manipulated. St. Paul
defended marriage as a measure which reduces licentious behavior,
and periods of fasting and regimens of exercise may be employed
for the same effect. Ritualistic techniques which affect the
physiology of the organism are common—in Hindu practices, for
example. Some religions encourage substitute forms of behavior to
reduce sexual or other tendencies; the practice is based upon the
transferred satiation discussed in Chapter IX. Since emotion is usually
an important means of religious control, respondent conditioning is
important. Religious art, music, and pageantry generate emotional
responses by portraying the suffering of martyrs, the torments of the
damned, the tender

RELIGION

355

emotions of the family, and so on. These responses are transferred
to stimuli, verbal or nonverbal, which are later used by the agency
for purposes of control. Some religious agencies resort to the use
of drugs, either to induce appropriate emotional or motivational
conditions or to produce effects which seem to support the claim
of a supernatural connection.
Other kinds of religious agencies. Many religious agencies make
no claim to be able to intervene in the arrangement of
reinforcements. The agency may accept the existence of
supernatural reinforcing events—for example, Heaven and Hell—
but may claim only to be able to prescribe a course of action upon
which they are contingent. The attainment of Heaven or Hell is
said to depend upon the behavior of the individual alone. The
agency controls the communicant, not by manipulating
contingencies of reinforcement, but by making certain real or
claimed contingencies more effective. Its techniques then resemble
those of the counselor (Chapter XXIV) or teacher (Chapter XXVI).
Such an agency is composed of those who establish their claim to
the knowledge of such a way of life and who exercise that claim
for purposes of control.
Still other religious agencies make no appeal to supernatural
events whatsoever. Their techniques are scarcely to be
distinguished from those of the ethical group. The agency simply
furthers ethical control in encouraging good behavior and
discouraging bad. It functions as counselor or teacher in
demonstrating certain contingencies between "good" or "bad"
behavior and natural consequences. A way of life is set forth which
"brings its own reward." Membership in this third type of agency
is often not sharply defined.
THE BEHAVIOR CONTROLLED
BY THE RELIGIOUS AGENCY
The behavior which comes under religious control depends upon
the type of agency. For the medicine man, who uses his magic for
his own aggrandizement, "pious" behavior is simply any behavior
which reinforces him. On the other hand, the well-developed
religious agency which derives much of its power from the group
may control

356

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

largely in accordance with group practice. It works in concert with
ethical control in suppressing selfish, primarily reinforced behavior
and in strengthening behavior which works to the advantage of
others. The control is usually much more stringent, however, than
that exercised by the group. Variables are manipulated in ethical
control because of some current threat to the welfare of a member
of the group, but the religious agency maintains its practices
according to more enduring criteria of virtuous and sinful behavior.
Where eating and drinking may be restricted by ethical
reinforcement only when they work to the momentary
disadvantage of others, religious control may establish much
narrower limits by classifying gluttony as a deadly sin and
temperance as a cardinal virtue. Where sexual behavior is
controlled by the group mainly in certain competitive situations,
the religious agency may encourage chastity and celibacy as a
general program and may tolerate sexual behavior even in
marriage only for the purpose of procreation. Acquisitive or
possessive behavior which leads to group retribution only in a
competitive situation and is elsewhere classified as good may be
wholly suppressed, regardless of the circumstances, by the
religious agency which demands a vow of poverty or enjoins the
communicant not to lay up treasures on earth. The boastful
behavior of the Pharisee, which encounters only moderate group
censure, is suppressed in favor of humility and modesty. The
extremity of this form of religious control is seen in the suppression
of the behavior of self-preservation in pacifistic philosophies, acts
of martyrdom, and the mortification of the flesh. On the other
hand, behavior which benefits others is promoted. Love or charity
as a disposition to favor others is encouraged, and the communicant
is reminded that he is his brother's keeper and must give all that he
has to the poor.
The religious agency usually establishes a repertoire of
obedience for future use, and it may also set up extremely powerful
self-control to guarantee a measure of controlled behavior in the
absence of the religious agent. The latter is one of the consequences
of an emphasis on punishment. Because the control is often exerted
more powerfully than by the group, the religious conscience or
superego often

RELIGION

357

speaks in a louder voice than the ethical. Extreme measures of selfrestraint are sometimes enjoined. The individual may confine
himself to restricted diets, enter upon periods of fasting, engage in
certain exercises or adopt certain postures, or take certain drugs—all
because of the resulting change in his dispositions to act in virtuous
or sinful ways. Self-control through the manipulation of stimuli is
common. "Temptation" (often personified in religious literature as
Satan) embraces all the stimuli which lead to sinful behavior.
"Wrestling with the devil" appears to describe the conflict between
the controlled and controlling responses of Chapter XV.
EXPLAINING THE AGENCY
The controlling relations which hold the religious agency
together as an effective unit do not account for the ultimate form of
control, nor would they explain the agency which has only one
member. To account for the existence and maintenance of the
agency as a whole we turn to external variables. If the agency serves
the group by extending ethical control, the agency may be
explained by the support which the group gives it. The religious
agent may be paid by the group, he may be disposed to control
because the group approves this as "right," or he may be coerced
into working for the agency because any other course of action
would be punished as "wrong."
There is another possible interpretation of the behavior of some
religious agents. When an individual is conditioned through ethical
and religious practices to "avoid temptation"—to eliminate stimuli
which would otherwise be conducive to wrong or sinful behavior
— his efforts may be so extensive that they affect other people as
well. Freud called the result "reaction formation." If the
individual's behavior in this respect resembles religious control, he
may simply join the agency. He is reinforced for serving as a
religious agent by the effect upon his own behavior. If economic or
coercive control appears to be unimportant, his zeal may be
unusually conspicuous. Since this explanation presupposes that the
religious agent himself has an especially high probability of
engaging in sinful behavior, it is generally resisted.

358

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

COUNTERCONTROL
An agency always operates within certain limits. The religious
agency may come into conflict with other religious agencies
attempting to control the same people or with governmental
agencies with different programs of control. Religious control is
often opposed by economic and educational agencies and, as we
shall see in Chapter XXIV, by psychotherapy.
Another limit is internal. It is imposed by the extent to which the
controllee will submit to control. The claim to supernatural
intercession supplies a powerful technique. Religious agencies, like
all other agencies here being considered, have sometimes used their
power for personal or institutional advantages—to build
organizations, to accumulate wealth, to punish those who do not
come under control easily, and so on. From time to time this has
given rise to measures of countercontrol which have restricted the
scope of the agency. The religious controllee may simply leave the
sphere of control of the agency, he may question the reality of
claimed contingencies, he may attack the agency by establishing a
rival agency, and so on.
JUSTIFICATION OF RELIGIOUS CONTROL
The justification of religious practice is an important part of
theology. A particular practice may be recommended because it
maximizes some such entity as salvation or the glory of God. Such
justifications are presumably beyond the realm of science. An
analysis of techniques permits us to account for the behavior of
both controller and controllee without raising the question of any
ultimate effect of this sort. When a religious practice does not appeal
to supernatural events, its traditional justification resembles that of
ethical control; a religious practice is supported because it
maximizes piety or virtue. These entities have a function in the
field of religion similar to that of the greatest good of the greatest
number in ethics, and freedom or justice in government. They are
"principles" in terms of which we choose or suggest a given
practice. Whether a science of behavior provides us with any basis
for explaining why we choose or suggest such a principle will be
considered in Section VI.

CHAPTER

XXIV

PSYCHOTHERAPY

CERTAIN BY-PRODUCTS OF CONTROL

The control exercised by the group and by religious and
governmental agencies, as well as by parents, employers, associates,
and so on, restricts the selfish, primarily reinforced behavior of the
individual. It is exercised for just that reason. Certain by-products,
however, are not to the advantage of the controller and are often
harmful both to the individual and to the group. These are especially
likely to be encountered when the control is excessive or inconsistent.
Escape. The individual may simply run away from the controller.
The hermit escapes from the control of the ethical group by
physically withdrawing from it, as the boy runs away from home;
but the controllee may be "withdrawn" without being actually
separated. Escape from religious control is represented by disbelief
and defection, and from various forms of governmental control by
desertion, evasion, renunciation of citizenship, and breaking jail.
Revolt. The individual may counterattack the controlling agent.
He may respond to criticism from the group by criticizing it in turn;
the liberal accuses the group of being reactionary, the libertine
359

360

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

accuses it of being prudish. Vandalism is a more concrete example
of counteraggression—toward the group as a whole or toward a
specific subgroup, as in the willful destruction of school property.
Religious revolt may be directed toward a specific agency, as in
protestant reform, or against the theological system used in control,
as in atheism. Revolt against governmental control is exemplified,
not only by political revolution, but, when the structure of the
group permits, by impeachment or a vote of no confidence.
Passive resistance. Another result, far less easily described,
consists of simply not behaving in conformity with controlling
practices. This often follows when the individual has been
extinguished in efforts to escape or revolt. The behavior is
epitomized by the mule which fails to respond to the aversive
stimulation of the whip. The child, unsuccessful in avoiding or
revolting against parental control, simply becomes stubborn. The
employee, unable to escape (by resigning) or to revolt in
vandalism or other acts of violence, simply "slows down," "sits
down," or "strikes." Thoreau's civil disobedience, practiced perhaps
most conspicuously by Gandhi, is the parallel reaction to
governmental control.
The controlling agency usually deals with these by-products by
intensifying its practices. The escapee is captured and confined
more securely. The revolt is put down, and the revolutionist shot.
The apostate is excommunicated. A fire is built under the mule,
and Thoreau is jailed. The agency may also meet this problem by
preparing the individual in advance to control his own tendencies
to escape, revolt, or strike. It classifies these types of behavior as
wrong, illegal, or sinful, and punishes accordingly. As a result any
tendency on the part of the individual to escape, revolt, or strike
generates aversive self-stimulation, a reduction in which may
reinforce behavior acceptable to the agency. But in the long run the
problem cannot be solved in this way. Intensification of control
may simply multiply the difficulties. Physical restraint or death
may effectively eliminate behavior, but the individual is no longer
useful to the group. Restraint is unsuccessful in controlling the
covert behavior in which the individual may plan escape or revolt.
Restraint also cannot control many sorts of emotional reactions.
Techniques designed to gen-

PSYCHOTHERAPY

361

erate additional self-control of emotional behavior are, as we have
seen, especially inadequate.
The by-products of control which incapacitate the individual or
are dangerous either to the individual or to others are the special
field of psychotherapy. We shall discuss this as a kind of controlling
agency. Among the kinds of behavior which it treats we may
distinguish certain effects primarily in the field of emotion and
others in operant behavior.
EMOTIONAL BY-PRODUCTS OF CONTROL
Fear. The controlling practice which leads the individual to escape
also gives rise to the emotional pattern of fear. Reflex responses in
glands and smooth muscles are first elicited by the aversive stimuli
used in punishment and later by any stimuli which have occurred at
the same time. These responses may be accompanied by a profound
change in operant behavior—an increase in the strength of any
behavior which has led to escape and a general weakening of other
forms. The individual shows little interest in food, sex, or practical
or artistic enterprises, and in the extreme case he may be essentially
"paralyzed by fear."
When the stimuli which have this effect are supplied by the
punishing agent, the individual suffers from an excessive fear of
his father, the police, God, and so on. When they arise from the
occasion upon which punished behavior has occurred, the
individual is afraid of such occasions. Thus if he has been
punished for sexual behavior, he may become unduly afraid of
anything which has to do with sex; if he has been punished for being
unclean, he may become unduly afraid of filth; and so on. When the
stimuli are generated by the punished behavior itself, the individual
is afraid to act—he is, as we say, afraid of himself. It is often difficult,
for either the individual himself or anyone else, to identify the
stimulation responsible for the emotional pattern. If the condition
recurs frequently, as is especially likely to be the case with selfgenerated stimuli, the fear may become chronic.
The phobias represent excessive fear reactions to circumstances
which are not always clearly associated with control. But the fact that

362

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

they are "unreasonable" fears—fears for which no commensurate
causal condition can be found—suggests that they are primarily
responses to punishment and that the fear generated by excessive
control has simply been displaced (Chapter X).
Anxiety. A common accompaniment of avoidance or escape is
anxiety. As we saw in Chapter XI, fear of a future event may be
aroused by specific stimuli which have preceded punishing events or
by features of the general environment in which such events have
occurred. Anxiety may vary in intensity from a slight worry to
extreme dread. The condition includes both responses of glands and
smooth muscles and marked changes in operant behavior. We imply
that the condition is due to controlling practices when we call it
shame, guilt, or a sense of sin.
Anger or rage. The emotional pattern which accompanies revolt
includes responses of glands and smooth muscles and a well-marked
effect upon operant behavior which includes a heightened disposition
to act aggressively toward the controlling agent and a weakening of
other behavior. The emotion may be displaced from the controlling
agent to other people or to things in general. A mild example is a
bad temper; an extreme one, sadism. The temper tantrum appears to
be a sort of undirected revolt.
Depression. Emotional responses associated with passive resistance
are of several kinds. The stubborn child also sulks; the adult may be
depressed, resentful, moody, listless, or bored, depending upon minor
details of control. (Boredom arises not simply because there is nothing
to do but because nothing can be done—either because a situation is
unfavorable for action or because the group or a. controlling agency
has imposed physical or self-restraint.)
All these emotional patterns may, of course, be generated by
aversive events which have nothing to do with social control. Thus
a storm at sea may generate fear or anxiety, a door which will not open
may engender frustration or rage, and something akin to sulking is
the emotional counterpart of protracted extinction, as at the end of a
long but fruitless struggle to win an argument or repair a bicycle. By
far the greater part of the inciting circumstances of this sort,

PSYCHOTHERAPY

363

however, are due to the control of the individual by the group or by
governmental or religious agencies.
The effects may be severe. Productive patterns of behavior are
distorted by strong emotional predispositions, and the operant
behavior which is strengthened in emotion may have disastrous
consequences. Frequent or chronic emotional responses of glands
and smooth muscles may injure the individual's health. Disorders of
the digestive system, including ulcers, and allergic reactions have
been traced to chronic responses in fear, anxiety, rage, or
depression. These are sometimes called "psychosomatic" disorders.
The term carries the unfortunate implication that the illness is the
effect of the mind upon the body. As we have seen, it is sometimes
correct to say that an emotional state causes a medical disability, as
when a chronic response of glands or smooth muscles produces a
structural change, such as an ulcer, but both cause and effect are
somatic, not psychic. Moreover, an earlier link in the causal chain
remains to be identified. The emotional state which produces the
disability must itself be accounted for and treated. The manipulable
variables of which both the somatic cause and the somatic effect
are functions lie in the environmental history of the individual.
Some psychosomatic "symptoms" are merely parallel effects of
such a prior common cause. For example, an asthmatic attack is
not the effect of anxiety, it is part of it.
SOME EFFECTS OF CONTROL
UPON OPERANT BEHAVIOR
Control through punishment may also have unforeseen effects
upon operant behavior. The process of self-control miscarries when
the individual discovers ways of avoiding aversive self-stimulation
which prove eventually to be ineffective, troublesome, or
dangerous. Emotional reactions may be involved, but we are
concerned here with the operant effect only.
Drug addiction as a form of escape. Certain drugs provide a
temporary escape from conditioned or unconditioned aversive
stimulation as well as from accompanying emotional responses.
Alcohol is conspicuously successful. The individual who has
engaged in behavior

364

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

which has been punished, and who therefore feels guilty or
ashamed, is reinforced when he drinks alcohol because selfgenerated aversive stimuli are thus suppressed. A very strong
tendency to drink may result from repeated reinforcement,
especially if the aversive condition is severe. The word "addiction"
is often reserved for the case in which the drug provides escape
from the aversive effects called withdrawal symptoms, which are
produced by the earlier use of the drug itself. Alcohol may lead to
this sort of addiction, but such drugs as morphine and cocaine
show it more clearly. Addiction at this stage is a different problem,
but the earlier use of the drug can usually be explained by its effect
upon the consequences of punishment.
Excessively vigorous behavior. The individual may show an
unusually high probability of response which is not "well adapted
to reality" in the sense that the behavior cannot be accounted for in
terms of current variables. It can sometimes be explained by
pointing to an earlier history of control. When effective escape is
impossible, for example, a highly aversive condition may evoke
ineffective behavior in the form of aimless wandering or searching.
Simple "nervousness" is often of this sort. The individual is uneasy
and cannot rest, although his behavior cannot be explained
plausibly in terms of its current consequences.
Sometimes there are obvious consequences, but we need to
appeal to an earlier history to show why they are reinforcing. For
example, behavior may provide a measure of escape by generating
stimuli which evoke reactions incompatible with the emotional byproducts of punishment. Thus in "thrill-seeking" the individual
exposes himself to stimuli which evoke responses incompatible
with depression or boredom. We explain why the "thrill" is
reinforcing by showing that it supplants an aversive result of
excessive control. Sometimes the behavior to be explained can be
shown to be a form of "doing something else." A preoccupation
which does not appear to offer commensurate positive
reinforcement is explained by showing that it avoids the aversive
consequences of some other course of action. Some compulsions
and obsessions appear to have this effect. A preoccupation with
situations in which punished behavior is especially unlikely to
occur may be explained in much the same way. When the

PSYCHOTHERAPY

365

excessive behavior is an extension of a technique of self-control in
which the environment is altered so that it becomes less likely to
generate punished behavior, the effect is Freud's "reaction
formation."
Excessively restrained behavior. The special caution with which
one drives a car after an accident or near accident may also be
generated by the aversive events used in control. Repeated
punishment may produce an inhibited, shy, or taciturn person. In the
so-called "hysterical paralyses" the restraint may be complete. The
etiology is usually clear when the paralysis is limited to a particular
part of the topography of behavior. Thus the individual who is
excessively punished for talking may stop talking altogether in
"hysterical aphasia." No control, aversive or otherwise, will succeed
in generating verbal behavior. Similarly, the individual who has been
punished—perhaps only through self-generated aversive consequences
—for striking a friend may develop a paralyzed arm. This is different
from the paralysis of fear. It is the difference between being too
frightened to move and being afraid to move. The first of these
conditions can be generated by an event which is not contingent
upon behavior, and it is usually not localized topographically. The
second is a result of the punishing consequences of previous
movement.
Defective stimulus control. When behavior has been severely
punished, either by a controlling agency or by the physical
environment, the individual may come to make ineffective or
inaccurate discriminative responses. A stimulus similar to that which
evoked the punished behavior may evoke no response whatsoever.
When the stimulus pattern is complex, we say that the individual
"refuses to face the facts." When, for example, he does not see a very
obvious object, we say that he suffers from a "negative hallucination."
All reactions to a given mode of stimulation are absent in hysterical
anesthesia. A child may begin by "paying no attention" to a nagging
parent, but the behavior of "doing something else instead" may be so
successful in avoiding aversive stimulation and possibly aversive
emotional responses to such stimulation that a complete
"functional" deafness may develop.
A commoner result is simply defective discrimination. In projec-

366

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

tion, for example, the individual reacts incorrectly or atypically to a
given state of affairs, and his behavior can often be traced to the
avoidance of effects of control. In a "show of bravado" a situation is
characterized as nothing to be afraid of and is therefore less likely to
generate the fear for which the individual has been punished. In
some hallucinations a situation in which punishment has been
received is "seen" as free of any threat. In a delusion of persecution a
distorted reaction to the environment permits the individual to
escape from the aversive self-stimulation generated by behavior or a
failure to behave for which he has been punished.
Defective self-knowledge. The individual may also react
defectively to stimuli generated by his own behavior. In simple
boasting, for example, he characterizes his own behavior in a way
which escapes aversive stimulation. He boasts of achievement to escape
the effects of punishment for incompetence, of bravery to escape the
effects of punishment for cowardice, and so on. This sort of
rationalizing is best exemplified by delusions of grandeur in which all
aversive self-stimulation may be effectively masked. It has already been
shown that complete lack of self-knowledge—a form of negative
hallucination or hysterical anesthesia restricted to self-stimulation—can
be attributed to the avoidance of the effects of punishment (Chapter
XVIII).
Aversive self-stimulation. One may injure oneself or arrange to be
injured by others. One may also deprive oneself of positive reinforcers or arrange to be so deprived by others. These consequences
may or may not be contingent upon behavior in the form of
punishment, and we have seen that the effect of the contingency is, in
any case, not clear. Such self-stimulation is explained if it can be
shown that the individual thus avoids even more aversive consequences.
If a conditioned aversive stimulus characteristically precedes the
unconditioned by an appreciable interval of time, the total effect of
the prolonged conditioned stimulus may be more aversive than that of
the briefer unconditioned stimulus. The individual can then escape
from the anxiety of impending punishment by "getting it over with." The
murderer in Dostoevski's Crime and Punishment turns himself

PSYCHOTHERAPY

367

over to a punishing governmental agent. Religious confession occurs
because expiation is less aversive than a sustained sense of sin. It has
been argued, particularly by Freud, that "accidents" are sometimes a
species of aversive self-stimulation which alleviates a condition of
guilt or sin.
It is not always possible to find a specific history of punishment
which will explain a given instance of aversive self-stimulation. Why
an individual injures himself or arranges to be injured by others
"masochistically" may be difficult to explain. In the absence of a
more obvious explanation, it may be argued that such behavior
reduces a sustained state of shame, guilt, or sin. When many different
kinds of responses have been punished under many different
circumstances, conditioned aversive stimuli may be widely
distributed in the environment, and a condition of anxiety may be
chronic. Under these circumstances aversive self-stimulation may be
positively reinforcing. Another possible explanation of masochistic
self-stimulation is that the process of respondent conditioning has
been effective in the wrong direction. In punishment aversive stimuli
are paired with the strongly reinforcing consequences of, say, sexual
behavior. The expected result is that sexual behavior will
automatically generate conditioned aversive stimuli—but the
aversive stimuli used in punishment may become positively
reinforcing in the same process.
PSYCHOTHERAPY AS A
CONTROLLING AGENCY
Behavior which is inconvenient or dangerous to the individual
himself or to others often requires "treatment." Formerly this
treatment was left to friends, parents, or acquaintances, or to
representatives of controlling agencies. In simple "good advice" a
course of action which should have advantageous consequences is
recommended, A great deal of casual therapy is prescribed in
proverbs, folklore, and other forms of lay wisdom.
Psychotherapy represents a special agency which concerns itself
with this problem. It is not an organized agency, like a government
or religion, but a profession, the members of which observe more or

368

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

less standardized practices. Psychotherapy has already become an
important source of control in the lives of many people, and some
account is therefore required here.
Diagnosis. The psychotherapist must of course know something
about the patient whom he is treating. He must have certain
information about his history, about the behavior which calls for
treatment, and about the current circumstances in which the patient
lives. The examination of the patient has been heavily emphasized
in clinical psychology. How to conduct an interview, how to take a
life history, how to analyze trains of thought in free association,
how to determine probabilities of response from projective tests or
dreams, and how to use these probabilities to infer histories of
deprivation, reinforcement, or emotional stimulation have all been
studied. Tests of intelligence and other traits have been devised to
enable the therapist to predict how readily the patient will react to
various kinds of therapy.
It is often implied that diagnosis, merely as the collection of
information about the patient, is the only point at which a science
of behavior can be helpful in therapy. Once all the facts about an
individual have been collected, treatment is left to good judgment
and common sense. This is an example of a broad
misunderstanding of the application of the methods of science to
human behavior. The collecting of facts is only the first step in a
scientific analysis. The demonstrating of functional relationships is
the second. When the independent variables are under control, such
relationships lead directly to control of the dependent variable. In
the present case, control means therapy. An adequate science of
human behavior should make perhaps a greater contribution to
therapy than to diagnosis. Nevertheless, the extension of science to
therapy has met with resistance, possibly for certain reasons to be
considered in Chapter XXIX.
The steps which must be taken to correct a given condition of
behavior follow directly from an analysis of that condition. Whether
they can be taken will depend, of course, upon whether the therapist
has control over the relevant variables.

PSYCHOTHERAPY

369

Therapy. The initial power of the therapist as a controlling agent
arises from the fact that the condition of the patient is aversive and
that any relief or promise of relief is therefore positively
reinforcing. To explain why the patient turns to the therapist in any
given instance requires the analysis of a rather complicated history,
much of which is verbal. Assurances of help, various forms of
evidence which make such assurances effective, the prestige of the
therapist, reports of improvement in other patients, slight signs of
early improvement in the patient himself, evidences of the wisdom
of the therapist in other matters—all enter into the process but in
much too complex a way to be analyzed here. In addition the
therapist may use variables which are available to him in personal
control or as a member of the ethical group or which derive from
his resemblance to members of the patient's family or to
governmental or religious agents who have already established
control in other ways.
All in all, however, the original power of the therapist is not very
great. Since the effect which he is to achieve requires time, his first
task is to make sure that the time will be available. The therapist
uses whatever limited power he originally possesses to make sure
that the patient will remain in contact with him—that the patient
will return for further treatment. As treatment progresses, however,
his power increases. As an organized social system develops, the
therapist becomes an important source of reinforcement. If he is
successful in providing relief, the behavior of the patient in turning
to him for help is reinforced. The therapist's approval may become
especially effective. As his knowledge of the patient grows, he may
also use positive reinforcers which are, in a sense, beyond his
control by pointing up contingencies between particular forms of
behavior and particular consequences. He may demonstrate, for
example, that various aversive events actually result from the
patient's own behavior. He may suggest modes of action which are
likely to be positively reinforced. Once the therapist has acquired
the necessary control, he may also suggest schedules or routines
which affect levels of deprivation or satiation, which arrange for the
presentation of stimuli leading to the conditioning or extinction of
emotional reflexes, which eliminate stimulating situations having
unfortunate consequences,

370

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

and so on. These schedules, adopted first because of the verbal
control of the therapist, eventually acquire other sources of strength
if their effect upon the condition of the patient is reinforcing.
The nonpunishing audience. The commonest current technique of
psychotherapy is due to Sigmund Freud. It has been characterized in
many different ways in many different theories of behavior. So far as
we are concerned here, it may be described simply in this way: the
therapist constitutes himself a nonpunishing audience. The process
through which he does this may take time. From the point of view
of the patient, the therapist is at first only one more member of a
society which has exerted excessive control. It is the task of the
therapist to establish himself in a different position. He therefore
consistently avoids the use of punishment. He does not criticize his
patient nor object to his behavior in any way. He does not point out
errors in pronunciation, grammar, or logic. In particular, he avoids
any sign of counteraggression when the patient criticizes or
otherwise injures him. The role of nonpunisher is made clearer if
the therapist frequently responds in ways which are incompatible
with punishment—for example, if he returns a conspicuous
demonstration of friendship for aggressive attack or dismisses the
patient's report of punishable behavior with a casual, "That's
interesting."
As the therapist gradually establishes himself as a nonpunishing
audience, behavior which has hitherto been repressed begins to
appear in the repertoire of the patient. For example, the patient may
recall a previously forgotten episode in which he was punished. Early
experiences in which aversive control was first felt, and which have
been long repressed, often supply dramatic examples. The patient
may also begin to describe current tendencies to behave in
punishable ways—for example, aggressively. He may also begin to
behave in punishable ways: he may speak ungrammatically,
illogically, or in obscene or blasphemous terms, or he may criticize or
insult the therapist. Nonverbal behavior which has previously been
punished may also begin to appear: he may become socially
aggressive or may indulge himself selfishly. If such behavior has been
wholly repressed, it may at first reach only the covert level; the
individual may begin to behave verbally or nonverbally "to himself"—
as in fantasying pun-

PSYCHOTHERAPY

371

ished behavior. The behavior may later be brought to the overt level.
The patient may also begin to exhibit strong emotions: he may have a
good cry, make a violent display of temper, or be "hysterically"
silly.
If, in the face of such behavior, the therapist is successful in
maintaining his position as a nonpunisher, the process of reducing
the effect of punishment is accelerated. More and more punished
behavior makes its appearance. If, however, the therapist becomes
critical or otherwise punishes or threatens to punish, or if previously
punished behavior begins to be emitted too rapidly, the process
may suddenly cease. The aversive condition which arises to reverse
the trend is sometimes spoken of as "resistance."
There is a second stage in the therapeutic process. The
appearance of previously punished behavior in the presence of a
nonpun-ishing audience makes possible the extinction of some of the
effects of punishment. This is the principal result of such therapy.
Stimuli which are automatically generated by the patient's own
behavior become less and less aversive and less and less likely to
generate emotional reactions. The patient feels less wrong, less
guilty, or less sinful. As a direct consequence he is less likely to
exhibit the various forms of operant behavior which, as we have
seen, provide escape from such self-generated stimulation.
PSYCHOTHERAPY VERSUS RELIGIOUS
AND GOVERNMENTAL CONTROL
The principal technique of psychotherapy is thus designed to
reverse behavioral changes which have come about as the result of
punishment. Very frequently this punishment has been administered
by religious or governmental agencies. There is, therefore, a certain
opposition between psychotherapy and religious and governmental
control. The opposition is also seen when the psychotherapist
advocates changes in established controlling techniques. For example,
he may recommend a modification of police action against young
offenders or certain types of psychopathic personalities. This
opposition has attracted considerable attention. Representatives of
some religious agencies have accused psychotherapists of fostering
immoral

372

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

tendencies, and, for similar reasons, government officials have resisted
reforms proposed by psychotherapists.
Although there is a fundamental opposition in the behavioral
processes employed, there is not necessarily any difference in the
behavior which these three agencies attempt to establish. The
psychotherapist is interested in correcting certain by-products of
control. Even though he may dispute the efficacy of certain
techniques, he will probably not question the need for the behavior
which the religious or governmental practice is designed to establish.
In avoiding the by-products of excessive control, he may reinstate a
certain amount of selfish behavior in the individual by weakening the
aver-sive stimulation which results from religious or governmental
control; but he will agree that selfish behavior must be suppressed by
the group and by agencies operating within and for the group, and
he must prepare his patient to accept this control.
The techniques available to religious and governmental agencies
are extremely powerful, and they are frequently misused with
disadvantageous results both to the individual and to the group.
Some degree of countercontrol on the part of psychotherapy or some
similar agency is therefore often needed. Since the variables under
the control of the therapist are relatively weak, and since he must
operate within certain ethical, religious, and legal limits, he can
scarcely be regarded as a serious threat. Whether we can decide
ultimately upon the "best" degree of religious or governmental
control will be considered in Section VI.
TRADITIONAL INTERPRETATIONS
What is "wrong" with the individual who displays these by-products
of punishment is easily stated. A particular personal history has
produced an organism whose behavior is disadvantageous or
dangerous. In what sense it is disadvantageous or dangerous must be
specified in each case by noting the consequences both to the
individual himself and to others. The task of the therapist is to
supplement a personal history in such a way that behavior no
longer has these characteristics.
This is not, however, the traditional view. The field of psycho-

PSYCHOTHERAPY

373

therapy is rich in explanatory fictions. Behavior itself has not been
accepted as a subject matter in its own right, but only as an
indication of something wrong somewhere else. The task of
therapy is said to be to remedy an inner illness of which the
behavioral manifestations are merely "symptoms." Just as religious
agencies maximize salvation or piety, and governmental agencies
justice, freedom, or security, so psychotherapy is dedicated to the
maximizing of mental health or personal adjustment. These terms
are usually negative because they are defined by specifying
unhealthy or maladjusted behavior which is absent in health or
adjustment. Frequently, the condition to be corrected is called
"neurotic," and the thing to be attacked by psychotherapy is then
identified as a "neurosis." The term no longer carries its original
implication of a derangement of the nervous system, but it is
nevertheless an unfortunate example of an explanatory fiction. It
has encouraged the therapist to avoid specifying the behavior to be
corrected or showing why it is disadvantageous or dangerous. By
suggesting a single cause for multiple disorders it has implied a
uniformity which is not to be found in the data, Above all, it has
encouraged the belief that psychotherapy consists of removing
certain inner causes of mental illness, as the surgeon removes an
inflamed appendix or cancerous growth or as indigestible food is
purged from the body. We have seen enough of inner causes to
understand why this doctrine has given psychotherapy an
impossible assignment. It is not an inner cause of behavior but the
behavior itself which—in the medical analogy of catharsis—must be
"got out of the system."
The belief that certain kinds of "pent-up" behavior cause trouble
until the organism is able to get rid of them is at least as old as the
Greeks. Aristotle, for example, argued that tragedy had a
beneficial effect in purging the individual of emotional behavior.
On the same analogy it has been argued that competitive sports
permit both the participant and the spectator to rid themselves of
aggressive tendencies. It has been argued that the human infant
has a certain amount of sucking behavior which he must
eventually get rid of, and that if he does not exhaust this behavior
in the normal process of nursing, he will suck his fingers or other
objects. We have seen

374

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

that it is meaningful to say that an organism is disposed to emit
behavior of a given form in a given amount. Such behavior spends
itself in the process of extinction, for example. But it does not
follow that a potential disposition causes trouble or has any other
effect upon the organism until it has been spent. There is some
evidence that sucking behavior in the infant is reinforced by
nursing and is then made more rather than less likely to occur. It is
also a tenable hypothesis that competitive sports generate rather
than relieve aggressive tendencies. In any case, the variables to be
considered in dealing with a probability of response are simply the
response itself and the independent variables of which it is a
function. We have no reason to appeal to pent-up behavior as a
causal agent.
On the assumption that the inner causes of neurotic or maladjusted
behavior are subject to gross physiological assault, cures are
sometimes attempted by administering drugs, by performing
surgery upon the nervous system, or by using drugs or electric shock
to set off violent convulsions. Such therapy is obviously directed
toward a supposed underlying condition rather than toward the
behavior itself or the manipulable variables outside the organism to
which the behavior may be traced. Even "functional" therapy, in
which external variables are manipulated, is often described with
the same figure of speech. The therapist is regarded as rooting out
a source of trouble. The conception is not far removed from the
view—which large numbers of people still hold—that neurotic
behavior arises because the Devil or some other intruding
personality is in temporary "possession" of the body. The
traditional treatment consists of exorcising the Devil—driving him
out of the individual by creating circumstances which are
appropriately aversive to him—and some treatments of multiple
personality differ from this only in avoiding theological
implications. The lesser demons of modern theory are anxieties,
conflicts, repressed wishes, and repressed memories. Just as pentup emotion is purged, so conflict is resolved and repressed wishes
and memories are released.
This view of mental illness and therapy owes most to Sigmund
Freud. It appears to have withstood assault largely because of
Freud's contributions in other directions. His great achievement, as
a dis-

PSYCHOTHERAPY

375

ciple of his said recently, was to apply the principle of cause and
effect to human behavior. Aspects of behavior which had hitherto
been regarded as whimsical, aimless, or accidental, Freud traced to
relevant variables. Unfortunately, he chose to represent the
relationships he discovered with an elaborate set of explanatory
fictions. He characterized the ego, superego, and id as inhabitants of
a psychic or mental world subdivided into regions of conscious, coconscious, and unconscious mind. He divided among these
personalities a certain amount of psychic energy, which flowed
from one to the other in a sort of hydraulic system. Curiously
enough, it was Freud himself who prepared the way for dismissing
these explanatory fictions. By insisting that many mental events
could not be directly observed, even by the individual himself, he
widened the scope of the psychic fiction. Freud took full advantage
of the possibilities, but at the same time he encouraged an analysis
of the processes of inference through which such events might be
known. He did not go so far as to conclude that references to such
events could be avoided altogether; but this was the natural
consequence of a further examination of the evidence.
Freud's conceptions of mental disease and therapy were closely
related to his conception of a mental life. Psychoanalysis was
regarded as depth psychology, concerned with discovering inner
and otherwise unobservable conflicts, repressions, and springs of
action. The behavior of the organism was often regarded as a
relatively unimportant by-product of a furious struggle taking
place beneath the surface of the mind. A wish which has been
repressed as the result of aversive consequences struggles to
escape. In doing so it resorts to certain devices which Freud called
"dynamisms"—tricks which the repressed wish uses to evade the
effects of punishment. Therapy is concerned with discovering the
repressed wish and rooting it out, or occasionally repressing it
more securely, so that the symptoms will disappear.
The present view of therapy is quite different. The Freudian wish
is a device for representing a response with a given probability of
occurrence. Any effect of "repression" must be the effect of the
variables which have led either to the response itself or to the
repressing

376

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

behavior. We have to ask why the response was emitted in the first
place, why it was punished, and what current variables are active.
The answers should account for the neurotic behavior. Where, in
the Freudian scheme, behavior is merely the symptom of a
neurosis, in the present formulation it is the direct object of
inquiry.
Let us consider the apparent result of the struggle of a wish to
express itself. An example which permits us to observe the
principal Freudian dynamisms is sibling rivalry. Let us say that two
brothers compete for the affection of their parents and for other
reinforcers which must be divided between them. As a result, one
brother behaves aggressively toward the other and is punished, by
his brother or by his parents. Let us suppose that this happens
repeatedly. Eventually any situation in which aggressive action
toward the brother is likely to take place or any early stage of such
action will generate the conditioned aversive stimulation associated
with anxiety or guilt. This is effective from the point of view of the
other brother or the punishing parent because it leads to the selfcontrol of aggressive behavior; the punished brother is now more
likely to engage in activities which compete with and displace his
aggression. In this sense he "represses" his aggression. The
repression is successful if the behavior is so effectively displaced
that it seldom reaches the incipient state at which it generates
anxiety. It is unsuccessful if anxiety is frequently generated. Other
possible consequences, which are described by the so-called
dynamisms, are as follows:
The same punishment may lead the individual to repress any
knowledge of his aggressive tendencies (Chapters XVII and
XVIII). Not only does he not act aggressively toward his brother,
he does not even "know" that he has tendencies to do so.
He may control himself by changing the external environment so
that it is less likely to evoke aggressive behavior, not only in
himself but in others. As an example of reaction formation, he may
engage in social work, in campaigns against racial discrimination,
or in support of a philosophy of brotherly love. We explain his
behavior by showing that it contributes to the suppression of his
own aggressive impulses and hence toward a reduction in the
conditioned aversive stimulation resulting from punishment
(Chapter XV).

PSYCHOTHERAPY

377

He may actually injure his brother but rationalize his conduct. For
example, he may discipline his brother "for his own good" or may be
especially energetic in carrying bad news to him "because he ought
to know the worst." These expressions describe the behavior in such
a way that punishment is withheld by others and conditioned
aversive stimulation fails to be generated in the individual's own
behavior (Chapter XVIII).
He may sublimate his aggression by taking up an occupation in
which such behavior is condoned. For example, he may join the
armed services or the police or get employment in an abattoir or
wrecking company. This is response induction if different forms of
the behavior of striking are strengthened by a variable which
strengthens striking his brother (Chapter VI); it is stimulus
induction if different stimuli which show any property in common
with his brother evoke striking.
He may fantasy injuring or killing his brother. If this also generates
aversive stimulation, he may fantasy injuring or killing other people.
If he has the talent, he may write stories about the murder of a
brother, or if there is anxiety in connection with the word "brother,"
about other murders (Chapter XVIII).
He may dream of injuring or killing his brother or, if this generates
aversive stimulation, of injuring or killing someone who symbolizes
his brother—perhaps an animal which in another part of the dream
takes on his brother's features (Chapter XVIII).
He may displace his aggression by "irrationally" injuring an
innocent person or thing (Chapter X). This may occur simply
because emotional responses show stimulus induction—a man who
is angry with an absent office boy takes it out on another employee
—or because the displaced behavior will not be punished, at least so
severely —a man who is angry with his boss takes it out on the office
boy.
He may engage in aggressive wit by saying something which in one
sense injures his brother but in another escapes censure. The remark
is injurious and punishable if it is attributed to one variable, but not
if it is attributed to another. The response is witty simply in the
sense of being a function of two variables (Chapter XIV).
He may identify himself with prize fighters or with characters in a

378

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

sadistic movie or in stories about men who injure or kill their
brothers, in the sense that he will be highly disposed to imitate their
verbal and nonverbal behavior (Chapter XIV). He will be reinforced
by such stories and will report this fact, together with the emotional
reaction common to positive reinforcers, by saying he "enjoys" them.
He may project his aggression by describing a picture in which two
men are fighting as a picture of brothers (Chapter XIV), in the sense
that he is disposed to imitate such behavior and to suppose that the
men in the picture are responding to the same variables.
He may respond aggressively in a Freudian slip—for example, by
saying, "I never said I didn't hate my brother" instead of "I never
said I hated my brother" (Chapter XIV).
He may forget to keep an appointment with his brother or with
anyone who resembles him (Chapter XIV).
He may escape anxiety about punishment by "punishing himself"
—by masochistic behavior, by forcing himself to undertake arduous
or dangerous work, or by encouraging accidents.
He may develop certain physical symptoms, especially when he
is with his brother. These may be a characteristic form of
competitive behavior from which he gains an advantage, or the
presence of his brother may arouse strong responses of glands and
smooth muscles which have an injurious effect.
It would be difficult to prove that all these manifestations are due
to the early punishment of aggressive behavior toward a brother. But
they are reasonable consequences of such punishment, and the early
history may be appealed to if no other variables can be discovered
to account for the behavior. (If the behavior has no connection
with such a history, there is so much the less to explain in a
scientific analysis.)
Such manifestations are simply the responses of a person who
has had a particular history. They are neither symptoms nor the
surreptitious expression of repressed wishes or impulses. The
dynamisms are not the clever machinations of an aggressive
impulse struggling to escape from the restraining censorship of the
individual or of society, but the resolution of complex sets of
variables. Therapy does not consist of releasing a trouble-making
impulse but of introducing

PSYCHOTHERAPY

379

variables which compensate for or correct a history which has
produced objectionable behavior. Pent-up emotion is not the cause
of disordered behavior; it is part of it. Not being able to recall an
early memory does not produce neurotic symptoms; it is itself an
example of ineffective behavior. It is quite possible that in therapy
the pent-up emotion and the behavioral symptom may disappear at
the same time or that a repressed memory will be recalled when
maladjusted behavior has been corrected. But this does not mean
that one of these events is the cause of the other. They may both
have been products of an environmental history which therapy has
altered.
In emphasizing "neurotic" behavior itself rather than any inner
condition said to explain it, it may be argued that we are
committing the unforgivable sin of "treating the symptom rather
than the cause." This expression is often applied to attempts to
remove objectionable features of behavior without attention to
causal factors—for example, "curing" stammering by a course of
vocal exercises, faulty posture by the application of shoulder
braces, or thumb-sucking by coating the thumb with a bitter
substance. Such therapy appears to disregard the underlying
disorder of which these characteristics of behavior are symptoms.
But in arguing that behavior is the subject matter of therapy rather
than the symptom of a subject matter, we are not making the same
mistake. By accounting for a given example of disadvantageous
behavior in terms of a personal history and by altering or
supplementing that history as a form of therapy, we are considering
the very variables to which the traditional theorist must ultimately
turn for an explanation of his supposed inner causes.
OTHER THERAPEUTIC TECHNIQUES
There are many other ways in which behavior which calls for
remedial action may be corrected. When the difficulty cannot be
traced to the excessive use of punishment or to other aversive
circumstances in the history of the individual, different therapeutic
techniques must be developed. There is the converse case, for
example, in which ethical, governmental, or religious control has
been inadequate. The individual may not have been in contact with
controlling agents, he may have moved to a different culture where
his

380

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

early training is inadequate, or he may not be readily accessible to
control. Therapy will then consist of supplying additional controlling
variables. When the individual is wholly out of control, it is difficult
to find effective therapeutic techniques. Such an individual is called
psychotic.
Sometimes the therapist must construct a new repertoire which
will be effective in the world in which the patient finds himself.
Suitable behavior already in the repertoire of the patient may need
to be strengthened, or additional responses may need to be added.
Since the therapist cannot foresee all the circumstances in which the
patient will find himself, he must also set up a repertoire of selfcontrol through which the patient will be able to adjust to
circumstances as they arise. Such a repertoire consists mainly of better
ways of escaping from the aversive self-stimulation conditioned by
punishment.
Such constructive techniques may be needed after the
nonpunishing audience of the therapist has had its effect. If the
condition which is being corrected is the by-product of controlling
circumstances which no longer exist in the life of the patient,
alleviation of the effects of excessive control may be enough. But if
the patient is likely to be subjected to continued excessive or
unskillful control, therapy must be more constructive. The patient
may be taught to avoid occasions upon which he is likely to behave
in such a way as to be punished, but this may not be sufficient. An
effective repertoire, particularly in techniques of self-control, must
be constructed.
As another possible source of trouble, the individual may have
been, or may be, strongly reinforced for behavior which is
disadvantageous or dangerous. Behavior which violates ethical,
governmental, or religious codes is often by its very nature strongly
reinforcing. Sometimes, accidental contingencies may also arise. In
Sacha Guitry's film, The Story of a Cheat, a child is punished for
some trivial misbehavior by being denied his supper. But the
supper turns out to be poisonous, and the child is the only one of a
large family to survive. The implication that the child will then
dedicate himself to a life of crime is not entirely fanciful. Positive
reinforcement in atypical situations produces other forms of
ineffective or even crippling be-

PSYCHOTHERAPY

381

havior. For example, the social reinforcement supplied by a
particular person may become very powerful, and it may be
contingent upon behavior which is not effective in the world at
large. Thus when a solicitous parent supplies an unusual measure
of affection and attention to a sick child, any behavior on the part
of the child which emphasizes his illness is strongly reinforced. It
is not surprising that the child continues to behave in a similar
fashion when he is no longer ill. This may begin as simple
malingering, when it is scarcely to be distinguished from the
behavior of the malingerer who claims to have been injured in an
accident in order to collect damages, but it may pass into the more
acute condition of hysterical illness if the child himself becomes
unable to identify the relevant variables or correctly appraise the
possibilities of his own behavior. Other sorts of social
consequences have similar effects. The child who is angry with his
parents is reinforced when he acts in any way which injures them
—for example, in any way which annoys them. If such a condition
is long sustained, a repertoire may be established which will work
to the disadvantage of the child in his dealings with other people.
One obvious remedial technique for behavior which is the product
of excessive reinforcement is to arrange new contingencies in
which the behavior will be extinguished. The child is no longer
reinforced with affection for feigning illness or with a strong
emotional response for being annoying.
Just as the traditional conception of responsibility is abandoned
as soon as governments turn to techniques of control other than the
use of punishment, so the conception of therapy as the rooting out
of inner causes of trouble is not likely to be invoked to explain
these constructive techniques. There is, however, a roughly parallel
explanation which has been applied to all techniques of therapy.
When a therapist encounters a patient for the first time, he is
presented with a "problem" in the sense of Chapter XVI. The
patient usually shows a novel pattern of disadvantageous or
dangerous behavior, together with a novel history in terms of
which that behavior is to be understood. The particular course of
therapy needed in altering or supplementing this history may not be
immediately obvious. However, the therapist may eventually "see
what is wrong" and be able

382

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

to suggest a remedial course of action; this is his solution to the
problem. Now therapeutic experience has shown that when such a
solution is proposed to an individual, it may not be effective even
though, so far as we know, it is correct. But if the patient arrives at
the solution himself, he is far more likely to adopt an effective
course of action. The technique of the therapist takes this fact into
account. Just as the psychoanalyst may wait for a repressed
memory to make itself manifest, so the nonanalytic therapist waits
for the emergence of a solution from the patient. But here again we
may easily misunderstand the causal relation. "Finding a solution"
is not therapy, no matter who does the finding. Telling the patient
what is wrong may make no substantial change in the relevant
independent variables and hence may make little progress toward a
cure. When the patient himself sees what is wrong, it is not the fact
that the solution has come from within him which is important but
that, in order to discover his own solution, his behavior with
respect to his problem must have greatly altered. It follows from
the nature of disadvantageous or dangerous behavior that a
substantial change must be accomplished if the individual is to
identify the relevant variables. A solution on the part of the patient
thus represents a substantial degree of progress. No such progress
is implied when the therapist states the solution. Therapy consists,
not in getting the patient to discover the solution to his problem,
but in changing him in such a way that he is able to discover it.
EXPLAINING THE
PSYCHOTHERAPEUTIC AGENCY
The therapist engages in therapy primarily for economic reasons.
Therapy is a profession. The services which the therapist renders
are reinforcing enough to the patient and others to permit him to
exchange them for money (Chapter XXV). Usually the therapist is
also reinforced by his success in alleviating the conditions of his
patients. This is particularly apt to be true in a culture which
reinforces helping others as a standard ethical practice. Frequently
another important sort of reinforcement for the therapist is his
success in manipulating human behavior. He may have a personal
interest, for example,

PSYCHOTHERAPY

383

in proving the value of a particular theory of neurotic behavior or
of therapeutic practice. These return effects upon the agency will
determine in the long run the composition of the profession of
psychotherapy and the uniformity of its practices.
At certain stages in psychotherapy the therapist may gain a
degree of control which is more powerful than that of many
religious or governmental agents. There is always the possibility,
as in any controlling agency, that the control will be misused. The
countercontrol which discourages the misuse of power is
represented by the ethical standards and practices of the organized
profession of psychotherapy. The danger of misuse may, as we shall
see in Chapter XXIX, explain the current popularity of theories of
psychotherapy which deny that human behavior can in the last
analysis be controlled or which deliberately refuse to accept
responsibility for control.

CHAPTER

XXV

ECONOMIC CONTROL

We turn now to the use of positive reinforcement in the
practical control of behavior. This consists in general of the
presentation of food, clothing, shelter, and other things which
we call "goods." The etymology is significant. Like the
behavior of the individual which is positively reinforcing to
the group, goods are "good" in the sense of being positively
reinforcing. We sometimes speak of them also as "wealth." This
term has a similar etymological connection with positive
reinforcement, but it also includes generalized conditioned
reinforcers, such as money and credit, which are effective
because they may be exchanged for goods.
REINFORCING BEHAVIOR WITH MONEY
As a simple example of economic control an individual is induced to
perform labor through reinforcement with money or goods. The
controller makes the payment of a wage contingent upon the
performance of work. In actual practice, however, the process is
seldom as simple as this. When we tip a man or pay him for
performing a small service and thereby increase the probability of his
performing a similar service in the future, we do not depart far from
the laboratory study of operant reinforcement. Behavior has occurred
and has
384

ECONOMIC CONTROL

385

been strengthened by its consequences. This is also roughly true
when a man is steadily employed. His performance at a given time
is mainly determined by the contingencies of reinforcement which
have prevailed up to that time. When an explicit agreement is made,
however, prior verbal stimuli must be analyzed in order to account
for the effect of the economic contingency. Thus when we agree to
pay a man a given amount for a given piece of work, our promise to
pay is not far from the command analyzed in Chapter XXII, except
that reinforcement is now positive rather than negative. Payment is
contingent upon the verbal stimulus of the promise to pay and upon a
correspondence between the topography of the behavior and certain
verbal specifications. The offer, "I'll pay you two dollars if you mow
the lawn" specifies (1) behavior ("mowing the lawn"), (2) a
reinforcement ("two dollars"), and (3) a contingency ("if"). To
the prospective employee the whole remark serves as an occasion
which, if the offer is to be effective, must be similar to other
occasions upon which similar contingencies have prevailed.
WAGE SCHEDULES
Fixed-ratio schedules. With the exception of payment "by the job,"
the economic control of behavior follows certain schedules of
reinforcement. When a man is paid in terms of the number of units
of work completed, the schedule is essentially that of a fixed ratio. It
is usually known in industry as piecework pay. The same principle
applies to commission selling, to the craftsman who makes and sells a
standard product, to the writer who is paid by the story or book,
and to the small private contractor. Fixed ratio is, in general, a very
effective schedule of reinforcement. If the ratio is not too high—that
is, if the amount of work required per unit of pay is not too great—
and if each reinforcement is of a significant amount, the individual
will characteristically work at a high rate. This is as true of the pigeon
in the laboratory as of the man in industry. An employee who has
been paid on some other basis and then transferred to piecework pay
will usually show a considerable increase in speed. The increase is
partly the automatic result of the increasing frequency of reinforce-

386

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

ment which follows on a fixed-ratio schedule as the rate increases.
Some of it is due, as we have seen, to the fact that a high rate of
responding tends to prevail at the moment of reinforcement under
such a schedule. Progress toward the completion of a given number
of responses also has the effect of a conditioned reinforcer. The
schedule is more effective if this progress is emphasized—for example,
by a visible counter.
A fixed-ratio schedule may, in fact, be too effective. It leads not
only to high levels of activity, but to long working hours, both of
which may be harmful. A bricklayer paid in terms of the number of
bricks laid may "burn himself out" in a few years. Another objection
to the use of the schedule in industry is that the increased return to
the worker which follows conversion to such a schedule often seems
to justify increasing the ratio. Let us suppose that an employee
producing a hundred items per week is paid fifty dollars on a
weekly basis and that the management offers to pay this instead on a
piecework basis of one dollar for every two items. The effect upon
the employee is a rapid increase in production. Let us suppose that he
is able to increase his weekly wage to a hundred dollars. In terms of
current rates of pay this may appear to justify increasing the number
of items required per dollar to, say, three. As the piecework schedule
remains in force, production may continue to rise. In the long run a
very much higher rate of work may be generated by only a slight
increase in weekly pay. This is precisely the way in which in the
laboratory a high rate of responding is generated under a fixed-ratio
schedule.
When the ratio is high or the reinforcement trivial, a fixed-ratio
schedule characteristically produces a period of inactivity just after
each reinforcement. At very high ratios these periods may be greatly
prolonged. They represent, as we have seen, a condition of abulia
similar to that in complete extinction in which, although the
deprivation is severe, the individual simply "has no behavior
available." He finds it impossible to start on his next assignment. He
may report this by saying that he is discouraged, that he can't face
his job, and so on. A typical example of fixed-ratio pay is the
salesman selling on commission. When "business is not good," the
amount of work

ECONOMIC CONTROL

387

which must be done per unit of reinforcement is high, and abulia is
common.
The ratio and the magnitude of the reinforcement show a subtle
relation. Is a reinforcement of ten dollars per thousand items as
effective as one dollar per hundred, or one cent per item? If a man
places a fixed economic value upon his labor, there should be no
difference, but this is not the case. One can advance to a high ratio
only after a long history of reinforcement at lower ratios.
Especially with uneducated labor the ratio may be crucial. Thus a
contractor who employed peasant labor to move earth with
wheelbarrows found it most effective to pay a small amount each
time a full wheelbarrow was delivered to the proper point. The use
of piecework pay in industry or elsewhere presupposes a
considerable history of economic control.
Fixed-interval schedules. Labor is most commonly paid by the
day, week, month, or year. These appear to be fixed-interval
schedules. The size of the interval, like the size of the ratio, is a
rough function of earlier contingencies affecting the individual. The
wages of the day laborer are not only calculated on a daily basis,
they are often paid daily also. Substantial reinforcement at shorter
intervals is needed before payments spaced as much as a month
apart are effective. To analyze such a history in detail we should
have to investigate certain subsidiary kinds of behavior, some of
them verbal, which are generated by schedules of reinforcement and
which bridge the gap between working on, say, the first day of the
month and being reinforced on the last. Such an analysis would
have to include the effect of agreements or contracts between
employer and employee.
In any case, however, wages received at fixed intervals do not
parallel the intermittent reinforcements described in Chapter VI. In
human behavior certain prominent stimuli, commonly correlated
with the time of payment, make a temporal discrimination
possible. The performance of a pigeon or rat under fixed-interval
reinforcement changes dramatically when a stimulus is arranged to
vary in some way with the passing of time between reinforcements.
Clocks and calendars are verbal devices designed to supply stimuli
of this sort to the human subject. When such stimuli are available,
the worker— whether human or subhuman—waits until the
reading on the clock

388

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

is very close to that at which behavior is reinforced. If there were
no other factors involved, payment for work at the end of each
week would generate only a small amount of work just before paytime.
It is necessary, therefore, to supplement fixed-interval schedules
with other techniques of control. The supervisor or "boss" is a
source of aversive stimulation contingent upon any behavior which
falls below certain specifications, including a minimum rate of
production. Some of the power available to the supervisor may be
derived from his position in the ethical group—he may condemn
laziness or poor work as bad or something to be ashamed of—but
insofar as he "can't do any worse than fire a man," his main
aversive stimulation is the threat of dismissal. Wages serve in such
a case simply to create a standard economic condition which may
be withdrawn aversively. The boss threatens dismissal, or some
measure which is effective because it is a step toward dismissal,
whenever the employee slows down; he removes that threat when
the employee speeds up. Eventually the behavior of the employee
generates comparable aversive stimulation; he works at a rate just
above that at which he feels guilty or threatened. The use of an
aversive boss is an excellent example of the general principle that
when punishment is abandoned in favor of positive reinforcement,
there is a tendency to turn to other forms of aversive control. The
threat of withholding an accustomed positive reinforcement is
always available for this purpose. Payment of wages is an obvious
advance over slavery, but the use of a standard wage as something
which may be discontinued unless the employee works in a given
manner is not too great an advance.
A production line moving at a set rate makes the contingency
between speed of work and aversive stimulation more clear-cut.
This "pacing" of behavior is by no means a modern achievement.
The galley slave pulled his oar to avoid the whip, which was
contingent upon his failing to pull in unison with others. A line of
reapers swinging scythes in unison paced each other—the basic
rhythm being determined in part by a leader but also in part by the
length and mass of the pendulum composed of man and scythe—
because any deviation brought aversive stimulation, often
dangerous, from the scythes of other reapers. The production line
has the effect of reducing some of

ECONOMIC CONTROL

389

the personal attributes of aversive stimulation by a boss, but a
danger inherent in any pacing system is the temptation on the part
of the controller to increase the pace.
Combined schedules. Fixed-interval schedules are also
supplemented in industry by various sorts of "incentive pay." These
are combinations of fixed-interval and fixed-ratio schedules. Each of
the component schedules corrects some of the shortcomings of the
other. Supplementary aversive stimulation from a supervisor is not
needed if the ratio component is effective. At the same time the
ratio component may not be enough to lead to dangerously high
rates or long hours of work. When a salesman is paid partly on
salary and partly on commission, the combination is designed to
correct the abulia which might otherwise follow reinforcement at a
high ratio.
Variable schedules. Laboratory studies have shown that
variable-interval and variable-ratio schedules are superior to fixed
schedules in sustaining performance, but it is not easy to adapt
such schedules to the payment of wages. A contract between
employer and employee which guarantees a given return, either per
interval of time or per unit of work, rules out a genuine variable
schedule. Such schedules may be used, however, in the payment of
money—such as a bonus— not specified in a contract or
contingent upon behavior in any other way. The bonus would
usually be classed as an emotional variable which predisposes the
individual favorably toward his work or his employer, but it may
also act as a reinforcer. Its effect as such is considerably reduced if it
is given on a fixed-interval schedule. The standard Christmas bonus,
for example, eventually functions primarily as part of the pay
which may be withdrawn as a form of aversive stimulation in
dismissal. An unpredictable bonus, given in smaller sums on a
variable-interval schedule but in approximately the same amount
annually, would have a much greater effect.
Differential reinforcement of quality of work. Wages are
usually contingent upon specified behavior at a specified level of
quality or skill. In general the performance of an employee, like
that of the laboratory animal, adjusts quite accurately to the exact
contingencies of reinforcement. Both "do no more than they need
to do." Addi-

390

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

tional economic reinforcement may be made contingent upon work
which exceeds minimum standards. Bonuses, raises, and
promotions, when contingent upon exceptional performance, shape
the topography of behavior in the direction of quality or skill
(Chapter VI).
Extra-economic factors. It is now generally recognized that the
employee seldom works "just for the money." The employer who
relies exclusively on economic control overlooks the fact that the
average worker is reinforced in other ways. The individual
craftsman not only constructs something which he can sell for
money, he is reinforced by his success in dominating the medium
in which he works and in producing an article for which he
receives approval. These additional reinforcements may have a
substantial effect in sustaining his level of work. They are often lost
in mass-production methods in which the worker receives only an
economic reinforcement for his achievement. To say that the
craftsman is motivated by "pride in his work" does not help us to
understand the problem. In order to deal effectively with the
behavior of the employee we must in any given case be able to
specify the actual circumstances which are reinforcing, and
perhaps how they have come to be reinforcing.
The effect of the reinforcement of the worker is not shown in his
rate of production if that rate is determined by an aversive pacing
system. Extra-economic factors in industry usually have a more
direct effect upon the behavior of the worker either in coming to
work or in staying on one job. Quite apart from his rate of
production while at work, the worker who "likes his job" shows
little absenteeism and a history of few changes of employment. He
likes his job in the sense that he is reinforced for coming to work—
not only by an effective wage schedule but by the conditions under
which he works, by his fellow workers, and so on. He dislikes his
job insofar as it has aversive properties. If he is kept at a high level
of work through constant aversive stimulation in the form of a
threat of dismissal, the whole task will become aversive and, when
his economic condition permits, he will remain absent or, if
possible, change jobs. Conditioned aversive stimuli associated with
sickness, unemployment, or hardship in old age may also have
important aversive effects. It does not help much in dealing with
these problems to say that the employee wants

ECONOMIC CONTROL

391

"freedom" or "security." In the design of optimal working
conditions, considered with respect not only to productivity but to
absenteeism and labor turnover, we need an explicit analysis of
actual reinforcing and aversive events.
THE ECONOMIC VALUE OF LABOR
That part of the behavior of the worker which is under economic
control generates aversive stimuli—from the nature of the work
itself or from the fact that it prevents the worker from engaging in
activities which would be reinforcing in other ways. These aversive
consequences are roughly offset by the economic reinforcement
which the worker receives. When the worker accepts or rejects the
offer of a job, he may be said to be comparing positive and
negative reinforcers. A similar comparison is made by the
employer. Since those who use economic control must give up the
goods or money with which they reinforce behavior, economic
reinforcement is by definition aversive to the controller.
If these conflicting consequences are roughly equal, the
individual may engage in behavior leading to a decision in the
sense of Chapter XIV. Shall a man mow his own lawn or pay
someone else to mow it for him? This will depend in part upon the
aversive properties of mowing the lawn and the aversive properties
of giving up the money needed to hire someone to mow it. It will
also depend upon the behavior of making a decision in which the
man may review other possible consequences of mowing the lawn
himself—the exercise may be good for him—or the kinds of things
for which the money which must be paid could otherwise be
exchanged, or ways in which he might earn that amount of money
less aversively than by mowing a lawn, and so on. The prospective
employee may alter similar conditions affecting his behavior in
accepting or rejecting an offer.
A "deal" is made in such a case if in avoiding the aversive
consequences of mowing the lawn, the employer offers an amount
equal to or greater than that which matches the aversive
consequences to the employee. The amount offered will also
depend upon the aversive consequences of giving up money. The
amount offered by the employer is what the job is "worth" to him
in his current economic

392

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

circumstances; the amount accepted by the employee is what the
job is "worth" to him in his current economic circumstances.
The "economic value" of labor or other personal services thus
has to do with the matching of positive and negative reinforcing
effects. The reinforcing effects of two tasks could be directly
compared, but money provides a single scale on which the
economic values of many different types of labor or services may
be represented. We have already seen that money has certain
advantages as a generalized reinforcer; it has fairly simple
dimensions, it can be made contingent upon behavior in a clear-cut
way, and its effects are relatively free of the momentary condition
of the organism. Money has a special advantage in representing
economic value because different amounts can be compared on a
single scale; one amount may be equal to another, twice as great as
another, and so on. This standard scale is so effective in comparing
reinforcers that it is often taken to represent some sort of
independent economic value not associated with positive or
negative consequences. The monetary scale is regarded as a
primary dimension of value. But the scale would have no meaning
apart from the comparison of other consequences.
To the employer the economic value of labor is just that amount
of money which he will give up in return for that labor. This
depends upon the results of the labor. We pay a man for mowing a
lawn if a mowed lawn is reinforcing. We pay him for making shoes
if shoes are personally reinforcing or can be exchanged for money
or goods which are reinforcing for other reasons. Sometimes
behavior itself is directly reinforcing, as in entertainment; we have
seen that the entertainer is in the business of making his behavior
positively reinforcing so that it will have economic value.
To the employee the economic value of labor is just that amount
of money for which he will supply that labor. The aversive
consequences against which he places a value upon his services
may be of many sorts. Hard labor is directly aversive, as is
confinement at a given task for long periods of time regardless of
the energy required. Some tasks are aversive for special reasons.
Thorndike found that people were in general willing to name a
price for engaging in a wide variety of aversive tasks—such as
letting a snake coil around one's

ECONOMIC CONTROL

393

arms and head, eating a dead earthworm, or spitting on a picture of
George Washington. Money which is paid for behavior which,
although not especially aversive in itself, may possibly lead to
punishment, is usually called a bribe. The bribe supplies a measure
of the economic value of a given probability of punishment.
Behavior has "nuisance value" when a man is paid for not
engaging in it. When a solicitous parent gives an allowance to his
son so long as he does not smoke or drink or marry before a given
age, the behavior which the son foregoes may have substantial
reinforcing properties for him. He "earns" his allowance by
accepting the aversive consequences of giving up the stipulated
reinforcements. When the behavior which is given up has no
substantial reinforcing consequences but would be highly aversive
to the man who pays to suppress it, the money paid is referred to as
blackmail. When the behavior is verbal—for example, testifying to
or otherwise reporting censurable behavior—it is commonly called
hush money. A similar controlling relation is exploited by the
underworld gang which sells "protection"—in other words, agrees
not to damage person or property in return for payment. Blackmail
and protection represent unstable social systems in the sense of
Chapter XIX. Such control is opposed by the ethical group or by
religious and governmental agencies which make aversive
consequences contingent upon engaging in such transactions.
BUYING AND SELLING
Buying and selling or exchanging in barter are so commonplace
that we are likely to overlook several of the processes involved.
The basic transaction or "deal" is expressed by the offer, "I will
give you this if you will give me that." As in transactions involving
personal labor, such complex stimuli are effective only after
extensive economic conditioning. The process is easy to observe as
a child learns to swap toys with his playmates or to buy penny
candy at the corner store. Before such behavior reaches a relatively
stable state, the child must be affected by the full aversive
consequences of giving up a toy or a penny and by the reinforcing
consequences of obtaining another toy or candy. When such
conditioning has taken place, similar behav-

394

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

ior with similar objects and similar money may become relatively
automatic, and it may be easy to overlook the complex
relationships involved. Whether a sale is made quickly or after
long deliberation depends upon whether the aversive properties of
giving up money or going without the object are matched by the
positively reinforcing properties of the money or the object. In "a
good bargain" the object bought is more highly reinforcing than
the money given up, and the sale takes place quickly. In the
doubtful bargain, positive and negative consequences are
relatively evenly matched, and the sale may take place only after
long deliberation.
The economic value of goods. The use of money in buying and
selling permits us to evaluate goods as we evaluated labor—on a
simple one-dimensional scale. An object is "worth" to an
individual just that amount of money which he will give up in
exchange for it, or in exchange for which he will give it up. Before
an exchange or a sale can occur, certain critical values must be
reached or exceeded. A will give the article to B if the aversive
consequences of this act are roughly matched by the positively
reinforcing consequences of the money which B will give to A. B
will give this amount of money to A if the aversive consequences
which are thus involved are matched by the positively reinforcing
consequences of receiving the article from A.
Several other conditions affect economic transactions. Since the
money which a man will give in exchange for goods is a measure
of the reinforcing effect of the goods, it will vary with the level of
deprivation. The value which a man assigns to food depends upon
how hungry he is. By keeping food in short supply he may be
induced to pay a high price. In the population as a whole this is
reflected by the fact that the price commonly paid for an object
can be manipulated by manipulating the supply. But how much a
man will pay for food also depends upon the aversive
consequences of giving up money, and this depends roughly upon
how much money he has. If "money is no object," he may pay a
high price. In the population as a whole the price of an object will
therefore be determined in part by the supply of money. These two
factors, the supply of goods and the supply of money, have, of
course, a prominent place in traditional

ECONOMIC CONTROL

395

economic theory. They are not, however, the only determiners of
economic transactions.
An important consideration is the history of reinforcement of the
behavior of acquiring or giving up goods or money. The behavior
of buying or selling may be strengthened or weakened apart from
the particular nature of a given transaction. When the reinforcing
consequences to the buyer greatly exceed the aversive
consequences of giving up the price of an article, the simple
behavior of buying is strengthened. In the technique of the bargain
store some objects are sold at a low price so that others, which are
not bargains, can also be sold. The "buying habits" of the public
often reflect the same principle. Whether an individual readily
engages in buying also depends in part upon previous aversive
consequences of giving up money. "Learning the value of a dollar"
is the effect of the aversive consequences of parting with a dollar.
The reinforcing effect of an article, and hence the price which
can be obtained for it, is enhanced by many techniques of
merchandising. The article is made "attractive" by design,
packaging, and so on. Properties of this sort make an object
reinforcing as soon as it is seen by the prospective purchaser, so
that a previous history with similar objects is not required.
Imitative behavior is relevant in buying and selling. An object
may be bought simply because other people are buying objects of
the same kind. This is the principle of the bargain crush and the
public spending spree. Testimonial advertising sets up imitative
patterns for the potential buyer by portraying other buyers or
possessors of goods. Imitative nonbuying is characteristic of
periods of deflation.
The balancing of positive and negative consequences may be
offset by altering the time which elapses between these
consequences and behavior. Sales are encouraged by promises of
immediate delivery. The same effect is felt, in the absence of an
agreement, when a mail order house by filling its orders as rapidly
as possible gains an advantage over a rival house with a longer
average delivery time. The behavior of mailing in an order is
probably not, strictly speaking, reinforced by the receipt of goods
after, say, four days; any reinforcing effect of such a consequence
must be mediated by verbal or nonverbal inter-

396

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

vening steps. But these intervening steps need not change the
advantage gained by reducing the time which passes between the
behavior and the ultimate consequence. Another kind of time
relation is manipulated when the purchaser is permitted to buy on
credit. In buying on the installment plan, the aversive
consequences of giving up the purchase price are postponed and
distributed. The effect is to be distinguished from the effect of
credit in permitting goods to be purchased before money is
available.
Another important factor contributing to the probability that an
individual will turn over money, either for other money or for
goods, is the schedule on which he is reinforced for doing so. A
faulty vending machine or dishonest vendor occasionally fails to
complete the exchange of goods for money. The probability of
engaging in transactions under similar circumstances is to some
extent reduced through extinction. However, if a vendor
characteristically offers an especially good bargain whenever the
transaction is completed, the probability may remain at a
significant value. In general, the greater the reinforcing effect of the
object exchanged for money, the more often reinforcements may
fail without extinguishing the behavior altogether. This is an
example of the type of economic interchange called gambling.
One may gamble with money for money, as in playing a roulette
wheel or slot machine; with money for goods, as in buying a
chance on an automobile; or with goods for money, as in playing a
customer double or nothing for the bill. The behavior of the
gambler is under very complex control depending upon his history
of reinforcement. It is sometimes possible to calculate the
"chances" of a given gambling system, and these, if known to the
gambler, may determine whether he will place a bet or not. How
the probability that a man will place a bet of a given size varies
with such factors as the size of the stake or a given history of
reinforcement can be studied experimentally. The predisposition to
continue betting under a given system, however, depends primarily
upon the schedule of reinforcement. Gambling devices in general
observe a variable-ratio schedule. From the point of view of the
gambling establishment this is a safe schedule because the
percentage profit in the long run is fixed. It is also an

ECONOMIC CONTROL

397

unusually effective schedule in generating gambling behavior. The
gambling establishment selects a mean ratio which is a compromise
between two consequences. Too high a ratio yields a large mean
profit per play but a loss of patronage. Too low a ratio yields too
small a profit in spite of a ready patronage. The professional gambler
"leads his victim on" by building a favorable history of
reinforcement. He begins with a low mean ratio under which
reinforcement occurs so frequently that the victim wins. The mean
ratio is then increased, either slowly or rapidly depending upon
how long the gambler plans to work with a particular victim. This is
precisely the way in which the behavior of a pigeon or rat is
brought under the control of a variable-ratio schedule. A mean ratio
can be reached at which reinforcements occur so rarely that the
pigeon or rat spends more energy in operating the device than he
receives from the reinforcement with food, while the human subject
steadily loses money. All three subjects, however, continue to play.
Gambling devices make an effective use of conditioned reinforcers
which are set up by pairing certain stimuli with the economic reinforcers which occasionally appear. For example, the standard slot
machine reinforces the player when certain arrangements of three
pictures appear in a window on the front of the machine. By paying
off very generously—with the jack pot—for "three bars," the device
eventually makes two bars plus any other figure strongly reinforcing.
"Almost hitting the jack pot" increases the probability that the
individual will play the machine, although this reinforcer costs the
owner of the device nothing.
Gambling, then, is a system of economic control in which the
individual is induced to pay money in return for a reinforcement
the value of which is too small to lead to exchange under other
schedules. If a man cannot sell a car to one man for $3,000, he may
still sell it to 3,000 men for $1.00 if the culture has provided the
necessary history of variable-ratio reinforcement when its members
have "taken chances." If the gambling establishment cannot persuade
a patron to turn over money with no return, it may achieve the same
effect by returning part of the patron's money on a variable-ratio
schedule.
In summary, then, the probability that a transaction will take place

398

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

is a function of the levels of deprivation of buyer and seller with
respect to goods and money, upon the history of both participants
with respect to good and bad bargains, upon the temporary
characteristics of the object or the situation involved in
merchandising, upon the behavior of others engaged in similar
transactions, upon the temporal contingencies which govern the
receipt of goods or the giving up of money, and upon a history of
certain schedules of reinforcement. All these conditions follow
from an analysis of human behavior; they are also familiar features
in traditional discussions of economic behavior. They obviously
affect the usefulness and precision of the concept of economic
value. The reinforcing effect of either goods or money cannot be
stated without taking into account many different characteristics of
the history of the individual buyer or seller, as well as the external
circumstances under which a given economic transaction takes
place.
“ECONOMICS”
When millions of people engage in buying and selling, lending
and borrowing, renting and leasing, and hiring and working, they
generate the data which are the traditional subject matter of the
science of economics. The data include the quantities and locations
of goods, labor, and money, the numbers of economic transactions
in a given period, certain characteristics of transactions expressed as
costs, prices, interest rates, and wages, together with changes in
any of these as functions of time or other conditions.
Statements about goods, money, prices, wages, and so on, are
often made without mentioning human behavior directly, and many
important generalizations in economics appear to be relatively
independent of the behavior of the individual. A reference to
human behavior is at least implied, however, in the definition of all
key terms. Physical objects are not goods apart from their
reinforcing value. More obviously, money cannot be denned
without reference to its effect upon human behavior. Although it
may be possible to demonstrate valid relationships among the data
generated by the economic transactions of large numbers of
people, certain key processes in the behavior of the individual
must be considered. The traditional

ECONOMIC CONTROL

399

procedure has been to deduce the behavior of the individual
engaging in economic transactions from the data derived from the
group. This procedure led to the Economic Man of nineteenthcentury economic theory, who was endowed with just the behavior
needed to account for the over-all facts of the larger group. This
explanatory fiction no longer plays a prominent role in economic
theorizing.
Some attention to the individual transaction is often required
when generalizations at the level of the group prove invalid. We
have already noted many special conditions which affect economic
value. In the data generated by millions of people the effects of
these special conditions may strike an average or cancel each other
out. But when a given condition holds for a large number of
people, it cannot be disposed of in this way. Economists frequently
explain the failure to predict a particular consequence from a broad
generalization by appealing to special conditions of this sort.
Although the supply of money and goods may suggest inflation,
for example, some external condition, not otherwise related to the
supply of money or goods, may generate undue caution on the part
of a large number of buyers, If the science of economics were to
take all such extra-economic variables into account, it would
become a complete science of human behavior. But economics is
concerned with only a small number of the variables of which the
behavior of the individual is a function. There are many practical
reasons why this limited area needs to be studied in relative
isolation. This means that the economist will always need to appeal
from time to time to the behavior of the real economic man.
Economic theory has been especially inclined to use the
principle of maxima and minima. The freedom, justice, and
security of the governmental agency, the salvation and piety of the
religious agency, and the mental health and adjustment of
psychotherapy have their parallels in "wealth," "profits," "utility,"
and many other concepts in terms of which economic transactions
have been evaluated. Since quantification is encouraged in
economic theorizing by the useful dimensions of money as a
generalized reinforcer, it may appear that these entities are more
easily adapted to a functional analysis. But it has not been shown
that they are, in fact, any more useful in pre-

400

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

dieting or controlling a given economic transaction than are their
counterparts in the other fields. The conception of economic
behavior which emerges from a functional analysis offers an
alternative possibility. The present chapter has, of course, dealt with
only a small fraction of the many kinds of economic transactions to
be observed in any large group of people, but an adequate science
of behavior should supply a satisfactory account of the individual
behavior which is responsible for the data of economics in general.
THE ECONOMIC AGENCY
The power to wield economic control naturally rests with those
who possess the necessary money and goods. The economic
agency may consist of a single individual, or it may be as highly
organized as a large industry, foundation, or even government. It is
not size or structure which defines the agency as such, but the use
to which the economic control is put. The individual uses his
wealth for personal reasons, which may include the support of
charities, scientific activities, artistic enterprises, and so on. The
eleemosynary foundation is engaged in disposing of wealth in
support of specified activities. Religious and governmental agencies
frequently, as we have seen, use this supplementary technique for
their special purposes.
If there is any special economic agency as such, it is composed
of those who possess wealth and use it in such a way as to
preserve or increase this source of power. Just as the ethical group
is held together by the uniformity of the aversive effect of the
behavior of the individual, so those who possess wealth may act
together to protect wealth and to control the behavior of those who
threaten it. To that extent we may speak of the broad economic
agency called "capital." The study of such an agency requires an
examination of the practices which represent concerted economic
control and of the return effects which support these practices.
COUNTERCONTROL
As in religious, governmental, or psychotherapeutic control,
economic power may be used to further the special interests of
those who possess it. Excessive control generates behavior on the
part of

ECONOMIC CONTROL

401

the controllee which imposes a practical limit. The group as a
whole usually condemns the excessive use of wealth as bad or
wrong, and classifies the charitable use of wealth as good or right.
Some counter-control is also exerted by religious and governmental
agencies. Under most modern governments, for example, the
individual cannot legally control many sorts of behavior through
economic power. Laws concerning prostitution, child labor,
fraudulent practices, gambling, and so on all impose limits.
Particular economic transactions are restricted, or rendered more or
less probable, by tariffs, levies, taxes on profits and on transactions,
price controls, changing the supply of money, government
spending, and so on. All these measures alter the balance between
those possessing labor or goods and those possessing money; hence
they alter the frequency with which certain kinds of economic
transactions take place. The effect is usually to reduce the extent to
which the possessor of wealth is able to employ it in controlling
others.

CHAPTER

XXVI

EDUCATION

In an American school if you ask for the salt in good French,
you get an A. In France you get the salt. The difference reveals the
nature of educational control. Education is the establishing of
behavior which will be of advantage to the individual and to others
at some future time. The behavior will eventually be reinforced in
many of the ways we have already considered; meanwhile
reinforcements are arranged by the educational agency for the
purposes of conditioning. The reinforcers it uses are artificial, as
such expressions as "drill," "exercise," and "practice" suggest.
Education emphasizes the acquisition of behavior rather than its
maintenance. Where religious, governmental, and economic
control is concerned with making certain kinds of behavior more
probable, educational reinforcement simply makes special forms
more probable under special circumstances. In preparing the
individual for situations which have not as yet arisen,
discriminative operants are brought under the control of stimuli
which will probably occur in these situations. Eventually,
noneducational consequences determine whether the individual
will continue to behave in the same fashion. Education would be
pointless if other consequences were not eventually forthcoming,
since the behavior of the controllee at the
402

EDUCATION

403

moment when he is being educated is of no particular importance
to any one.
EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES AND
THEIR TECHNIQUES OF CONTROL
The immediate family functions as an educational agency in
teaching the child to walk, to talk, to play, to eat in a given way, to
dress himself, and so on. It uses the primary reinforcers available to the
family: food, drink, and warmth, and such conditioned reinforcers
as attention, approval, and affection. The family sometimes engages
in education for obvious reasons—for example, because the child is
converted into a useful member. The "pride" which a parent takes in
the achievements of his children does not provide an explanation,
since the term simply describes the fact that the achievement of a
child is reinforcing. This fact appears to depend upon the culture.
The individual continues to receive many forms of casual instruction
from members of the group outside his family, where the variables
available to the group are similar to those in ethical control
(Chapter XXI). Certain forms of behavior are classified as good or
right and others as bad or wrong and are reinforced accordingly. It is
not always clear why this is done, however. An extension of ethical
control to education may, like family pride, have special advantages
for the group, in which case it can be explained only through an
analysis of cultural practices (Section VI).
. The artisan teaches an apprentice because in so doing he acquires a
useful helper, and industries teach those who work for them for a
similar reason. The reinforcers are usually economic. When a
government engages in military training to improve the efficiency
of its armed forces, the techniques are usually based upon
punishment or the threat of punishment. When religious agencies
turn to education to supplement other techniques, they also use the
variables peculiarly under their control. The educational agency,
then, is not distinguished by the nature of its variables but in the use
to which they are put. There is a difference between the use of
economic power to induce an apprentice to work and to induce him
to acquire effective forms of behavior, between the use of the threat
of punishment to

404

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

induce a soldier to fight and to induce him to fight effectively, and
between the use of the power peculiarly available to the religious
agency to reinforce pious behavior and to teach a catechism.
The educational institution. A more explicit educational agency
requires special treatment. Education is a profession, the members of
which engage in education primarily because of economic
reinforcement. As in many other professions, reinforcements
supplied by the ethical group are also often important: teaching is
not only a way of earning a living, it is "a good thing to do." In
explaining the presence of educational institutions in a given
community, then, we have to explain the behavior of those who pay
for or approve those who teach. What is received by them in return?
The private tutor extends family education, and the family pays for
his services for the same reason it educates its children directly. The
private school is a collaborative effort of the same sort. Religious or
trade schools are similar extensions of the activities of other agencies.
In explaining public education, certain immediate benefits to the
group as a whole may be pointed out. The lower grades of the public
schools take over the educational function of the family, supervise
the children during part of the day, generate behavior which is useful
to the family and the community and which permits the family to
escape censure. Comparable results from the education of older
children are not always clear, and this fact raises a practical as well as
a theoretical difficulty. The explicit educational agency is not found in
every culture, and the extent to which a given group supports it may
vary widely from time to time. When those who supply the ultimate
power, economic or otherwise, do not receive sufficient reinforcement
for doing so, they withdraw their support. Yet educators seldom
attempt to increase the return benefits or to make them more effective
as reinforcers.
Aside from any immediate return we have to note the possible
long-term effect of education. Like family pride or education by
members of the group, the explicit educational institution may be
explained by a different sort of consequence to the group to be
considered in Section VI.

EDUCATION

405

EDUCATIONAL REINFORCEMENT
The reinforcers used by established educational institutions are
familiar: they consist of good grades, promotions, Phi Beta Kappa
keys, diplomas, degrees, and medals, all of which are associated with
the generalized reinforcer of approval. The spelling bee is a familiar
device which makes approval or other social reinforcers explicitly
contingent upon scholastic behavior. The same technique is
represented by modern quiz programs in which "knowledge is
reinforced for its own sake." A certain exchange value is evident
when the recently educated individual is offered a job or is
automatically admitted to membership in certain controlling groups.
The educational agency usually wields no economic power itself,
however, except for prizes, fellowships, and scholarships. Some
reinforcers may be available in the form of privileges. The
institution may also have the support of the family which makes
primary or conditioned reinforcers contingent upon a level of
scholastic achievement—for example, by granting a special
allowance to the student who maintains a certain average. During
World War II some military education was taken over by
educational institutions, and a new and important reinforcer then
became available to the teacher in the form of military advancement.
The venerable place of punishment in educational control is
represented by the birch rod and the cane, as well as by the
condoning of certain forms of disciplinary violence—for example,
hazings. Extreme forms of physical punishment have now been
generally abandoned, but we have noted the general rule that when
one aversive consequence is dropped, another is often created to
take its place. Just as wages paid on a fixed-interval schedule may
eventually be used to supply aversive stimulation in the form of a
threat of dismissal, so the teacher of small children who does not
spank may nevertheless threaten to withdraw approval or affection
in a form of aversive control. In the same way, the positive
reinforcers available to schools and colleges are often used as the
basis for conditioned aversive stimulation in the form of a threat of
failure or dismissal.
By-products of control through punishment have always been con-

406

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

spicuous features of educational institutions. Hell-raisings, riots,
hazings, and truancy are forms of counteraggression or escape which
follow the analysis of Chapter XXIV. Somewhat more neurotic
byproducts are common. The advantages to be gained in turning to
other techniques of control are therefore obvious. But one mode of
control cannot be given up until something else is ready to take its
place, and there is evidence that the educational institution at the
moment lacks adequate control. Not only has the educator
relinquished the birch rod; he can no longer borrow discipline from
family practices based on aversive control. As more and more
people are educated, the honorific reinforcements of education are
weakened; fewer special advantages are now contingent upon
education. With increasing social security the economic consequences
of an education are also less important; relatively fewer students are
out to "make good" in amassing wealth or at least in escaping the
threat of a destitute old age.
Educational institutions have, therefore, turned to alternative
methods of control. The teacher, often unwillingly, uses the sources
of power available to him in personal control to make himself or his
teaching interesting; in other words, he becomes an entertainer.
Textbooks are supplied with pictures and diagrams which resemble
expositions of the subject matter in magazines or the press, and
lectures are supplemented with demonstrations and "visual aids."
Especially favorable circumstances for the execution of the behavior
to be controlled by the educational institution are arranged: libraries
are designed to make books more readily accessible, laboratories
are expanded and improved, facilities are provided for field trips
and periods of study in especially favorable locations. Subjects which
are not easily adapted to these techniques are often minimized or
discarded.
The term "progressive education" roughly describes a concerted
effort to find substitutes for the spurious reinforcements of
educational control. Consequences of the sort which will eventually
govern the behavior of the student are brought into the educational
situation. Under the traditional system the student who is reinforced
for speaking French correctly by an A is eventually reinforced, if at
all,

EDUCATION

407

when he enjoys books written in French or communicates
effectively in a French-speaking community. In progressive
education, these "natural" or "functional" reinforcements are
employed by the educational agency as soon as possible. Similarly,
the student who is studying science is reinforced as soon as
possible by his increasing competence in dealing with nature. By
permitting a wider choice of what is to be studied, the probability
is increased that scholastic behavior will receive such
noneducational reinforcement at an early date. It has perhaps
always been characteristic of good education to introduce "real"
consequences, but progressive education has made an effort to do
this as often and as soon as possible. A common objection has been
that certain fields of study are thus unduly emphasized at the
expense of others in which disciplinary training with merely
educational reinforcement cannot be avoided.
The conditioned reinforcers of the educational agency may be
made more effective by pointing up the connection with natural
contingencies to be encountered later. By informing the student of
the advantages to be gained from education, education itself may
be given reinforcing value. Many educational institutions have
therefore turned to counseling and various forms of therapy as
auxiliary techniques.
THE BEHAVIOR RESULTING
FROM EDUCATIONAL CONTROL
When educational reinforcements are made contingent upon
topographical or intensive properties of behavior, the result is
called skill. The differentiation discussed in Chapter VI is
characteristic of training in painting, music, handwriting, speaking,
sports, and crafts. The noneducational reinforcements which
eventually take control are the special consequences of skilled
behavior. In teaching a man to play tennis some such educational
reinforcer as the verbal stimulus "Good!" or "That's right!" is made
contingent upon the proper grip, the proper stroke, the proper
timing, and so on. The resulting "good form" is eventually
maintained by the natural consequences of the flight of the ball.
Similarly, the educational reinforcement of good technique in
painting is eventually replaced by the production of

408

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

pictures which are in themselves reinforcing. Technical skill in the
operation of tools and machines leads first to the approval of the
instructor and then to the successful production of objects which are
reinforcing.
Knowledge. The entity which is traditionally said to be maximized
by education is called "knowledge." The term refers to some of the
most complex kinds of human behavior, and it is therefore not
surprising that it has seldom been clearly defined or effectively
employed in evaluating educational practices. We sometimes use
the term to represent simply the probability of skilled behavior. A
man "knows how to write" in the sense that he possesses behavior
with pen and paper which will be emitted under suitable
circumstances and will generate certain kinds of marks. In a similar
sense he knows how to hit a tennis ball or sing a tune or draw a
straight line. Usually, however, knowledge refers to a controlling
relation between behavior and discriminative stimuli. The response
may be skilled, but we are concerned primarily with whether it will
be made upon the proper occasion. Thus, skilled movements are
needed in driving a car, but knowing how to drive a car is making the
proper responses at appropriate times. One knows how to repair a
radio in the sense, not of being able to manipulate pliers, screw
driver, and soldering iron, but of manipulating them in appropriate
places.
Most knowledge acquired in education is verbal. The stimuli which
constitute the appropriate occasions may be verbal or nonverbal. A
child "knows the alphabet," not because he can pronounce the names
of the letters, but because he can do so in the proper order. One
letter or group of letters is the occasion for pronouncing the letter
which follows. He "knows the capital of Peru" in the sense that he
will correctly answer when asked what the capital is or will make
statements about the capital in discussing Peru, and so on. A man
"knows his table of integrals" in the sense that under suitable
circumstances he will recite it, make corresponding substitutions in
the course of a calculation, and so on. He "knows his history" in
the sense of possessing another highly complex repertoire. In rare
instances parts of the historical repertoire are controlled by
nonverbal

EDUCATION

409

stimuli—the primary data of history; but historical knowledge is
largely verbal behavior in response to verbal stimuli. The
repertoire is useful primarily when the individual is in contact with
other individuals possessing similar knowledge. In other kinds of
knowledge, particularly in science, a greater part of the
discriminative stimuli may be nonverbal, and the repertoire is
useful primarily in enabling the individual to act effectively with
respect to nature. We need not regard such repertoires as "signs" of
knowledge but rather as knowledge itself. Knowledge enables the
individual to react successfully to the world about him just because
it is the very behavior with which he does so.
The contention that a knowledge of history, for example, is
simply a verbal repertoire does not mean that education is merely
rote learning. The student comes also to understand the facts of
history. An adequate explanation of what this means would require
an exhaustive analysis of verbal behavior which cannot be given
here.1 The individual agrees with a statement about a historical
event in the sense that he shows a high probability of making the
statement himself. The growing understanding with which he reads
and rereads a passage describing a period in history may also be
identified with the growing probability that he will emit verbal
responses similar to those which comprise the passage. But the high
probability which characterizes agreement or understanding may
have many sources; knowledge of a given field is coherent and well
integrated to the extent that these multiple sources of strength are
generally consistent. So far as the present point is concerned, we
may note simply that the supplementary sources of strength which
distinguish "understanding" from "tending to say" do not require us
to modify the view that knowledge is a repertoire of behavior.
Understanding is a collateral issue which concerns the variables of
which such a repertoire is a function.
A verbal repertoire also gains importance from the fact that it
may have concurrent effects upon other behavior of the individual.
One such effect is most easily observed when the verbal repertoire
and the change in behavior are located in different organisms. The
speaker
1

Cf. footnote on page 210.

410

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

has many effects upon the listener. One of these may conveniently be
called "instruction." The verbal stimulus generated by the speaker
alters the probability of a verbal or nonverbal response in the listener.
Let us assume, for example, that a man is familiar with electrical
apparatus and possesses a set of avoidance responses controlled by
parts of such an apparatus which are electrically charged or "hot."
In working with a new piece of apparatus, he acquires, perhaps apart
from any verbal instruction, appropriate avoidance behavior with
respect to certain features. The process is naturally aversive and may
not be necessary if the individual is instructed in the use of the
apparatus. When he is told, for example, that certain terminals are
hot, he avoids them even though he has not received aversive
stimulation from them. But the process of being told is complex. The
instruction involves the pairing of two stimuli—a complex verbal
stimulus generated as the speaker says "this terminal" and points to a
part of the apparatus and the verbal stimulus "hot." The occurrence
of these stimuli together has an effect similar to that of respondent
conditioning; the object identified as "this terminal" subsequently
evokes the avoidance behavior appropriate to objects designated
"hot." As we observe in the behavior of children, the capacity to be
affected by verbal behavior in this way develops only very slowly.
An educational institution often directly instructs the student in this
sense, but it usually functions by establishing a complex verbal
repertoire which the student later uses in what may be called selfinstruction. The speaker and the listener now inhabit the same skin.
Upon a given occasion verbal behavior is evoked which instructs the
student himself in nonverbal behavior. In a simple example, the
student memorizes a set of instructions and then later correctly
operates the device to which they are appropriate. In a far more
complex example, he acquires an extensive historical repertoire and
then deals effectively with a current situation when some of the
responses in that repertoire instruct him appropriately.
If we take knowledge to include not only a repertoire as such, but
all the effects which the repertoire may have upon other behavior,
then the acquisition of knowledge in education is obviously far more
than rote learning. Moreover, the educational institution does more

EDUCATION

411

than impart knowledge even in this broad sense. It teaches the
student to think, in the sense of Chapter XVI. It establishes a
special repertoire which has as its effect the manipulation of variables
which encourage the appearance of solutions to problems. The
student learns to observe, to assemble relevant materials, to
organize them, and to propose tentative solutions. Such a practice is
essential in preparing him for some kinds of future occasions. We
saw that the ethical group and religious and governmental agencies
cannot simply establish good, pious, or legal forms of behavior, but
must also set up processes of self-control which will enable the
individual himself to arrive at good, pious, or legal behavior on
novel occasions in the absence of members of the group or agency. In
the same way the educational institution cannot be content merely
with establishing standard repertoires of right answers but must
also establish a repertoire with which the student may, so to speak,
arrive at the right answer under novel circumstances in the absence of
any representative of the agency.
COUNTERCONTROL
Since the power over variables available to the educational
institution is in general weak, we might not expect to find that it is
often misused or that anyone is interested in countercontrol. There are,
however, several ways in which the control exercised by the educator
is commonly restricted. An educational institution is usually set up and
supported in terms of a particular curriculum. A child is sent to a
particular school largely because of what the school will teach. Those
who are in ultimate control—for example, those who supply the
institution with money—may insist that the curriculum be closely
followed. The college supported by a religious agency engages in
appropriate religious instruction and must not establish behavior
opposed to the interests of the agency. Schools supported by a
government may be asked to apply their educational techniques in
supporting the government and to avoid any education which
conflicts with governmental techniques of control or threatens the
sources of governmental power.

412

CONTROLLING AGENCIES

Since other types of agencies also engage in educational control,
they often enlist the services of the educational institution. Economic
and religious agencies sometimes supply materials for school use which
encourage education in line with economic or religious control. It
may be necessary for a governmental agency to restrict the extent to
which public schools serve other agencies in this way.

SECTION

THE CONTROL OF
HUMAN BEHAVIOR

VI

CHAPTER

XXVII

CULTURE AND CONTROL

MANNERS AND CUSTOMS

In addition to the ethical behavior discussed in Chapter XXI the
individual acquires from the group an extensive repertoire of manners and
customs. What a man eats and drinks and how he does so, what sorts of
sexual behavior he engages in, how he builds a house or draws a picture or
rows a boat, what subjects he talks about or remains silent about, what music
he makes, what kinds of personal relationships he enters into and what kinds
he avoids—all depend in part upon the practices of the group of which he is
a member. The actual manners and customs of many groups have, of course,
been extensively described by sociologists and anthropologists. Here we are
concerned only with the kinds of processes which they exemplify.
Behavior comes to conform to the standards of a given community when
certain responses are reinforced and others are allowed to go unreinforced or
are punished. These consequences are often closely interwoven with those of
the nonsocial environment. The way in which a man rows a boat, for
example, depends in part upon certain mechanical contingencies; some
movements are effective and others ineffective in propelling the boat. These
contingencies depend upon the construction of the boat and oars—which are
in turn the result

415

416

THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

of other practices observed by the boatmakers in the group. They
also depend upon the type of water, which may be peculiar to a
group for geographical reasons, so that the manner in which a boat
is rowed in an inland lake district is different from that along the
seacoast even when boat and oars are of the same type. The
educational contingencies established by the group are still another
source of difference. The individual- is reinforced with approval
when he adopts certain grips, postures, kinds of strokes, and so on,
and punished with criticism when he adopts others. These variables
are especially important in determining the "style" which
eventually becomes characteristic of a group.
The contingencies to be observed in the social environment
easily explain the behavior of the conforming individual. The
problem is to explain the contingencies. Some of these are
arranged for reasons which have no connection with the effect of
customs or manners upon the group. The community functions as a
reinforcing environment in which certain kinds of behavior are
reinforced and others punished, but it is maintained as such
through other return benefits. Verbal behavior is a good example.
In a given community certain vocal responses are characteristically
reinforced with food, water, and other services or objects. These
responses become part of a child's repertoire as naturally as
nonverbal responses reinforced by the same consequences. It does
not greatly matter whether a child gets a drink by bending over a
pool or by saying, "I want a drink of water." To explain why the
water is forthcoming in the latter case, however, requires a rather
elaborate analysis of the verbal environment. It is enough to note
here that a verbal environment may maintain itself through its
effects upon all participants, quite apart from its function in
teaching the language to new members of the community. An adult
in a new verbal environment may receive no explicit educational
reinforcement but may nevertheless acquire an adequate
vocabulary. Some nonverbal customs and manners can be
explained in the same way. Moreover, when a custom is
perpetuated by a governmental, religious, or educational agency,
we may point to the usual return benefits.
But there remains the fact that the community as a whole often

CULTURE AND CONTROL

417

establishes conforming behavior through what are essentially
educational techniques. Over and above the reciprocal
reinforcements which sustain verbal behavior, for example, the
community extends the classification of "right" and "wrong" to
certain forms of that behavior and administers the generalized
reinforcements of approval and disapproval accordingly. In many
groups a mistake in grammar or pronunciation is followed by more
aversive consequences than, say, minor instances of lying or
stealing. The group also supports educational agencies which
supply additional consequences working in the same direction. But
why is such deviant behavior aversive? Why should the group call
an ungrammatical response "wrong" if the response is not actually
ambiguous? Why should it protest unconventional modes of dress
or rebuke a member for unconventional table manners?
One classical answer is to show that a given form of deviant
behavior must have been aversive for good reason under an earlier
condition of the group. Foodstuffs are in general selected by
contingencies which follow from their physical and chemical
properties. Foods which are unpalatable, inedible, or poisonous
come to be left alone. A child who starts to eat such a food receives
powerful aversive stimulation from the group. "Good" and "bad"
foods are eventually specified in ethical, religious, or
governmental codes. When, now, through a change in climate or
living conditions, or as the result of changing practices in the
preparation and preservation of food, a "bad" food becomes safe,
the classification may nevertheless survive. There is no longer any
current return advantage to the group to explain why eating a
particular food is classified as bad. The classification may be
especially puzzling if the group has meanwhile invented an
explanation for it.
We may also show indirect, but presumably none the less
effective, current consequences. In his Theory of the Leisure Class,
Thorstein Veblen demonstrated that customs or manners which
seemed to have no commensurate consequences, and which were
explained in terms of doubtful principles of beauty or taste, had an
important effect upon other members of the group. According to
Veblen we do not necessarily wear "dress" clothes or speak useless
languages because

418

THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

the clothes are beautiful or the languages "cultured," but because we
are then accepted by a group in which these achievements are a mark
of membership and because we gain prestige in controlling those
who are unable to behave in the same way. According to this theory, a
modern American university builds Gothic buildings not because the
available materials resemble those which were originally
responsible for this style of architecture, or because the style is beautiful
in itself, but because the university then commands a more extensive
control by resembling medieval educational institutions. The
practices of the group which perpetuate a "good" style of architecture
are thus as easy to explain as those which perpetuate modes of
construction which are "good" for mechanical reasons.
Perhaps the simplest explanation of the differential reinforcement
of conforming behavior is the process of induction. The forces which
shape ethical behavior to group standards are powerful. The group
steps in to suppress lying, stealing, physical assault, and so on, because
of immediate consequences to its members. Its behavior in so doing is
eventually a function of certain characteristic features of the "good"
and "bad" behavior of the controlled individual. Among these is lack
of conformity to the general behavior of the group. There is thus a
frequent association of aversive properties of behavior with the
property of nonconformance to a standard. Nonconforming behavior
is not always aversive, but aversive behavior is always nonconforming.
If these properties are paired often enough, the property of
nonconformance becomes aversive. "Right" and "wrong" eventually
have the force of "conforming" and "nonconforming." Instances of
behavior which are nonconforming but not otherwise aversive to
the group are henceforth treated as if they were aversive.
No matter how we ultimately explain the action of the group in
extending the ethical classification of "right" and "wrong" to manners
and customs, we are on solid ground in observing the contingencies
by virtue of which the behavior characteristic of a particular group is
maintained. As each individual comes to conform to a standard
pattern of conduct, he also comes to support that pattern by
applying a similar classification to the behavior of others. Moreover,
his own conforming behavior contributes to the standard with
which the

CULTURE AND CONTROL

419

behavior of others is compared. Once a custom, manner, or style
has arisen, therefore, the social system which observes it appears
to be reasonably self-sustaining.
THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT
AS CULTURE
A social environment is usually spoken of as the "culture" of a
group. The term is often supposed to refer to a spirit or atmosphere
or something with equally nonphysical dimensions. Our analysis
of the social environment, however, provides an account of the
essential features of culture within the framework of a natural
science. It permits us not only to understand the effect of culture
but, as we shall see later, to alter cultural design.
In the broadest possible sense the culture into which an
individual is born is composed of all the variables affecting him
which are arranged by other people. The social environment is in
part the result of those practices of the group which generate
ethical behavior and of the extension of these practices to manners
and customs. It is in part the accomplishment of all the agencies
considered in Section V and of various subagencies with which the
individual may be in especially close contact. The individual's
family, for example, may control him through an extension of
religious or governmental techniques, by way of psychotherapy,
through economic control, or as an educational institution. The
special groups to which he belongs—from the play group or street
gang to adult social organizations—have similar effects. Particular
individuals may also exert special forms of control. A culture, in
this broad sense, is thus enormously complex and extraordinarily
powerful.
It is not, however, unitary. In any large group there are no
universally observed contingencies of control. Divergent customs
and manners often come into conflict—for example, in the
behavior of the child of immigrants, where social reinforcements
supplied by the family may not coincide with those supplied by
acquaintances and friends. Different institutions or agencies of
control may operate in conflicting ways; secular education often
conflicts with religious education, and government with
psychotherapy, while economic control

420

THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

is characteristically divided among many groups which wield their
power in different ways.
A given social environment may change extensively in the
lifetime of a single individual, who is then subjected to conflicting
cultures. In America, important changes have recently taken place in
the techniques used to control sexual behavior. The unmarried
female was formerly subjected to strict control by the ethical group
and by governmental, religious, and educational agencies. Access
to the world at large was forbidden or permitted only in the
company of a chaperon who might use physical restraint if
necessary. Stimuli leading to sexual behavior were, so far as
possible, eliminated from the immediate environment. The
anatomy and physiology of reproductive organs, particularly of the
male, remained obscure, and any behavior which might alter this
condition was severely punished. Such punishment, supplemented
by other procedures, generated behavior which reflected "purity" or
"modesty" as a form of self-control. Facts related to sexual behavior
which could not be concealed were explained in fictitious ways.
Incipient sexual behavior was, of course, severely punished, not
only with aversive stimulation, but with such powerful conditioned
punishments as disapproval, shaming, and threats of ostracism. As
a result any incipient sexual behavior gave rise to aversive selfstimulation. This provided for the reinforcement of further acts of
self-control and elicited emotional responses with which sexual
behavior was incompatible.
Such severe measures could be justified only by arguing that
sexual behavior was wrong, that it was nevertheless very powerful,
and that aggressive sexual behavior on the part of the male must
be met with exceptional defenses on the part of the female. There
were often objectionable by-products, however. Although the
control was intended to apply mainly to premarital sexual behavior,
the effect commonly extended into the marital state, and the
individual was prevented from enjoying sexual relations in a
normal fashion. The resulting repression of sexual impulses had
many of the neurotic effects outlined in Chapter XXIV—from
perverted sexual activity to the behavior of the common scold.
These consequences, doubtless in company with many other factors,
led to a substantial change in practice.

CULTURE AND CONTROL

421

The modern version of sexual control is very different. Although
there is no one clearly formulated program, it is recognized that
anxiety with respect to sexual behavior is unnecessary. Instead of
removing from the environment all stimuli which could possibly
lead to sexual behavior, a knowledge of the anatomy and function
of sex is supplied. Friendly relations with the opposite sex are
more freely permitted, and severe punishment of sexual behavior is
avoided in favor of instruction in the consequences of such
behavior. It is possible that these techniques are not so effective as
earlier measures. Sexual behavior is probably not so deeply
repressed, and it is also probably commoner at the overt level. The
net result may or may not be to the advantage of the individual and
the group.
In any case, the adolescent of today is affected by conflicting
techniques which show a transition from one cultural practice to
the other. In general, religious and governmental controls still
follow the earlier pattern. Within the family, members of different
ages frequently differ in their controlling techniques. The family as
a whole may differ substantially from other groups of which the
individual is a member. We cannot say that a single set of practices
with respect to the control of sexual behavior is characteristic of
the culture of such a person.
THE EFFECT OF CULTURE
UPON BEHAVIOR
It is often said that "human nature is the same the world over."
This may mean that behavioral processes are the same wherever
they are encountered—that all behavior varies in the same way
with changes in deprivation or reinforcement, that discriminations
are formed in the same way, that extinction takes place at the same
rate, and so on. Such a contention may be as correct as the
statement that human respiration, digestion, and reproduction are
the same the world over. Undoubtedly there are personal
differences in the rates at which various changes take place in all
these areas, but the basic processes may have relatively constant
properties. The statement may also mean that the independent
variables which determine behavior are the same the world over,
and this is another matter. Genetic

422

THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

endowments differ widely, and environments are likely to show
more differences than similarities, a large number of which may
be traced to cultural variables. The result is, of course, a high
degree of individuality.
The effect of a social environment upon the behavior of the
individual may be inferred point for point from an analysis of that
environment. Let us consider an individual at the age of thirty. To
what extent may his behavior reasonably be traced to the cultural
variables with which he has come into contact?
Work level. In the sense that particular parts of our subject's
repertoire show given probabilities as the result of reinforcement,
we say that he shows a given level of interest, enthusiasm, or
freedom from "mental fatigue." We are likely to find a high level
of relevant behavior if the physical environment includes a
favorable climate, an adequate food supply, and other resources. It
is also important that abundant positive reinforcement is supplied
by the family, the group as a whole, and various subgroups, as well
as by governmental, religious, psychotherapeutic, economic, and
educational agencies.
Motivation. Whether an individual is frequently hungry will
depend, not only upon the availability of food in the nonsocial
environment, but upon cultural practices which control what he
eats, when he eats it, whether he observes periods of fasting, and
so on. His sexual behavior will depend, not only upon the
availability of members of the opposite sex, but upon the ethical
control of sexual relations, upon governmental and religious
restrictions, upon sex education, and so on. Other kinds of
deprivation and satiation are also controlled by both social and
nonsocial conditions.
Emotional dispositions. The social environment is mainly
responsible for the fact that our subject may have grown up in an
atmosphere of love, hate, anger, or resentment, and that various
emotional patterns may therefore characterize his behavior.
Repertoire. The inanimate world builds an elaborate repertoire
of practical responses. It may also set up behavior which is
effective in extending such a repertoire: our subject will show a
strong "curiosity

CULTURE AND CONTROL

423

about nature" if exploratory responses have frequently been
reinforced, and special skills in research and invention if selfmanipulative behavior of the sort discussed in Chapter XVI has
been conditioned. But the comparable repertoire generated by the
culture is usually much more extensive. Verbal problem-solving
and the social skills employed in personal control are important
examples. All controlling agencies are concerned in part with the
creation of behavior of this sort, although it is the special concern,
of course, of education. The competence of the individual in
dealing with things, as well as men, will depend largely upon the
extent to which such agencies have characterized the social
environment.
Self-control. The inanimate environment may establish some
degree of self-control—for example, the individual may learn not
to eat a delicious but indigestible food—but by far the greater part
of self-control is culturally determined, particularly by ethical,
religious, and governmental agencies. The amoral individual who
escapes this influence shows the effect of too little control, while
the completely "inhibited" or restrained individual stands at the
other extreme. Whether our subject conspicuously displays the
other effects of his culture which we have just considered will often
depend upon this one effect. For example, he may behave readily in
an emotional fashion or show a stoical restraint depending upon the
extent to which his emotional behavior has been reinforced or
punished as right or wrong, legal or illegal, or pious or sinful.
Self-knowledge. Discriminative responses to one's own behavior
and to the variables of which it is a function appear to be the
exclusive product of the social environment. Whether or not our
subject will be self-conscious and introspective depends upon the
extent to which the group has insisted upon answers to questions
such as "What are you doing?" or "Why did you do that?"
Neurotic behavior. A purely physical environment could no
doubt generate behavior which was so ineffective, disadvantageous,
or dangerous that it would be called neurotic. By far the greater
source of trouble, however, is social. Whether or not our subject is
well balanced, in good contact with the environment, or free of
crippling

424

THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

emotional reactions will depend mainly upon the controlling
practices of the group into which he was born.
CULTURAL CHARACTER
When certain features of the social environment are peculiar to a
given group, we expect to find certain common characteristics in
the behavior of its members. A common culture should lead to a
common "character." Russian and American children learn to
throw stones and to keep from stubbing their toes in essentially the
same way because the relevant variables are principally in the
physical environment. They do not speak in the same way because
their verbal environments are different. Other kinds of behavior
which are socially reinforced are also different. The two groups
follow different classifications in shaping the behavior of the
individual as right or wrong. Religious, governmental,
psychotherapeutic, economic, and educational agencies differ
widely in the power and extent of their control. The effects of the
family and of business and social organizations are also different.
As a result Russians and Americans show very different behavioral
repertoires or "characters."
The concept of a group or cultural character, however, has all the
dangers inherent in any system of typology. There is always a
tendency to argue that, because individuals are similar in one
respect, they are similar in others also. Although certain features of
behavior may differ consistently between cultures, there are also
great differences among the individuals in a given group. We have
seen that a social environment is never wholly consistent. It is also
probably never the same for two individuals. Only those
characteristics of the social environment which are common to the
inhabitants of Russia and which differ from the characteristics of
any other social environment may be spoken of as "Russian
culture." The Russian language fulfills these conditions fairly well,
and it should be possible to detect certain corresponding features of
"Russian thought" as part of the Russian "character." It is not easy
to find other instances, especially of manners and customs, which
satisfy these conditions so well.
It is difficult to demonstrate a relation between a given cultural
practice and a characteristic of behavior on the empirical evidence

CULTURE AND CONTROL

425

obtained by studying a particular group. Recently certain aspects
of national character have been attributed to practices in the care
of infants. In some national or cultural groups a baby is held
essentially immobile throughout the greater part of the first year
through the use of swaddling clothes or a cradle board. It has been
argued that, especially in the last three months of the year, this
physical restraint is highly frustrating and leads to powerful
emotional predispositions. If the baby submits to restraint, the
effect may be evident in the behavior of the adult, who becomes a
"follower." If the restraint strengthens a typical pattern of rage or
revolt, the effect may be observed when he becomes a "leader." A
particular practice in caring for infants is thus said to produce two
types of adult character. The types fit nicely into an interpretation
of a particular political pattern, but the evidence is not satisfactory.
The extent to which such a cultural practice as swaddling
characterizes a group, and is absent from other groups with which a
comparison is being made, can presumably be determined by field
observation or other forms of inquiry. Whether the adult members
of any group fall into two classes showing, respectively, submissive
and aggressive behavior can also presumably be established,
although this has not been done. Even if we were to accept these
facts as proved, a relation between them would not therefore be
established. By the very nature of the cultural group as a sample,
many other practices will be associated with any one practice
chosen for study. Some other practice may therefore be responsible
for any demonstrated aspect of group character.
The anthropologist is interested in groups of people as such, and
he pays particular attention to the customs, manners, and other
features of behavior peculiar to a given group. So long as we are
not interested in any particular set of cultural practices, the issue
of a national or cultural character will not have the same urgency.
We may agree that if a group is characterized by a unique set of
practices, it may also be characterized by unique modes of
behavior, but the causal connection between the practice and the
mode of behavior may be left to a functional analysis of relevant
variables under the conditions characteristic of an experimental
science.

CHAPTER

XXVIII

DESIGNING A CULTURE

The social environment of any group of people is the product of a
complex series of events in which accident sometimes plays a
prominent role. Manners and customs often spring from
circumstances which have little or no relation to the ultimate effect
upon the group. The origins of more explicit controlling practices
may be equally adventitious. Thus the pattern of control exercised
by a strong leader, reflecting many of his personal idiosyncrasies,
may result in an established governmental classification of
behavior as legal or illegal and may even set the pattern for a
highly organized agency. The techniques which a saint employs to
control himself may become part of the established practices of a
religious agency. Economic control is determined in part by the
resources available to the group, which are ultimately a matter of
geography. Other fortuitous factors are introduced when different
cultures intermingle or when a culture survives important changes
in the nonsocial environment. A cultural practice is not the less
effective in determining the behavior characteristic of a group
because its origins are accidental. But once the effect upon
behavior has been observed, the source of the practice may be
scrutinized more closely. Certain questions come to be asked. Why
should the design of a culture be left so largely to accident? Is it
not

426

DESIGNING A CULTURE

427

possible to change the social environment deliberately so that the
human product will meet more acceptable specifications?
In many cultural groups we observe practices which might be
described as "making changes in practice." The great religious
books supply many examples of the deliberate construction of a
social environment. The Ten Commandments were a codification
of existing and proposed practices according to which, henceforth,
behavior was to be reinforced or punished by the group or by the
religious agency. The teachings of Christ were more clearly in the
nature of a new design. In governmental control, the enactment of
a law usually establishes new cultural practices, and a constitution
is a similar undertaking on a broader scale. Experimental curricula
in schools and colleges and books on child care which recommend
substantial changes in family practices are attempts to manipulate
important parts of a culture. The social environment is changed to
some extent when a new technique of psychotherapy is derived
from a theory or from an experimental study of human behavior.
Social legislation creates an experimental environment in which
behavior is more often reinforced with food, clothing, housing, and
so on, and in which certain kinds of deprivation are less likely to
occur. Planning the structure of a large industry or governmental
agency is an experiment in cultural design. These are all examples
of the manipulation of small parts of the social environment; what
is called "Utopian" thinking embraces the design of a culture as a
whole.
The deliberate manipulation of the culture is therefore itself a
characteristic of many cultures—a fact to be accounted for in a
scientific analysis of human behavior. Proposing a change in a
cultural practice, making such a change, and accepting such a
change are all parts of our subject matter. Although this is one of
the most complex of human activities, the basic pattern seems
clear. Once a given feature of an environment has been shown to
have an effect upon human behavior which is reinforcing, either in
itself or as an escape from a more aversive condition, constructing
such an environment is as easily explained as building a fire or
closing a window when a room grows cold. A doctor tells his
patient to stop eating a certain food so that he will no longer be
troubled by an allergy because he

428

THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

has observed a connection between the food and the allergy. The
psychotherapist tells his patient to change to a job to which he is
better suited so that he will suffer less from a sense of failure because a
similar connection has been established. An economist advises a
government to impose heavy taxes in order to check inflation because
still another relation has been observed. All these examples involve
many detailed steps, many of them verbal, and we should need a
more detailed analysis of scientific thinking than can be undertaken
here to give a reasonable account of particular instances. But the
basic process is clear enough to permit some interpretation.
When we speak of the "deliberate" design of a culture, we mean
the introduction of a cultural practice "for the sake of its
consequences." But as we saw in discussing "voluntary behavior"
in Chapter VII, it is never a future consequence which is effective.
A change in practice is made because similar changes have had
certain consequences in the past. When the individual describes his
own behavior, he may speak of past consequences as the "goal" of
his current action, but this is not very helpful. We can best
understand the cultural designer, not by guessing at his goals or
asking him to guess at them for us, but by studying the earlier
environmental events which have led him to advocate a cultural
change. If he is basing a given proposal upon scientific experiments,
we want to know how closely the experimental and practical situations
correspond. We may also want to examine other "reasons for making a
change" which are to be found in his personal history and in the
recorded history of those who have investigated similar areas.
VALUE JUDGMENTS
Such an interpretation of the behavior of the cultural designer
brings us to an issue of classical proportions. Eventually, a science of
human behavior may be able to tell the designer what kind of culture
must be set up in order to produce a given result, but can it ever tell
him what kind of result he should produce? The word "should"
brings us into the familiar realm of the value judgment. It is
commonly argued that there are two kinds of knowledge, one of fact
and the other of value, and that science is necessarily confined to
the

DESIGNING A CULTURE

429

first. Does the design of a culture demand the second? Must the
cultural designer eventually abandon science and turn to other ways
of thinking?
It is not true that statements containing "should" or "ought" have
no place in scientific discourse. There is at least one use for which
an acceptable translation can be made. A sentence beginning "You
ought" is often a prediction of reinforcing consequences. "You ought
to take an umbrella" may be taken to mean, "You will be reinforced
for taking an umbrella." A more explicit translation would contain at
least three statements: (1) Keeping dry is reinforcing to you; (2)
carrying an umbrella keeps you dry in the rain; and (3) it is going
to rain. All these statements are properly within the realm of science.
In addition to this, of course, the word "ought" plays a large part in
the control exercised by the ethical group and by governmental and
religious agencies. The statement, "You ought to take an umbrella,"
may be emitted, not as a prediction of contingencies, but to induce
an individual to take an umbrella. The "ought" is aversive, and the
individual addressed may feel guilty if he does not then take an
umbrella. This exhortatory use may be accounted for in the usual
way. It is nothing more than a concealed command and has no more
connection with a value judgment than with a scientific statement of
fact.
The same interpretation is possible when the reinforcing
consequences are of an ethical nature. "You ought to love your
neighbor" may be converted into the two statements: (1) "The
approval of your fellow men is positively reinforcing to you" and
(2) "loving your fellow men is approved by the group of which you
are a member," both of which may be demonstrated scientifically.
The statement may also be used, of course, to coerce an individual into
behaving in a fashion which resembles loving his neighbor, and
indeed is probably most often used for this reason, but again this is
not what is meant by a value judgment.
When a given change in cultural design is proposed primarily to
induce people to make the change, we may account for it as in the
exhortatory example above. The proposal may also be a prediction of
consequences. Sometimes these are easily specified, as when it is said
that the group "ought" to approve of honesty because its members

430

THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

will thus avoid being deceived or that it "ought" to disapprove of
theft because its members will then avoid the loss of property.
Sometimes the implied consequences are less obvious, as when a
study of behavior leads someone to propose that we "ought" to deal
with criminals in a certain way or that we "ought" to avoid aversive
control in education. It is at this point that the classical values of
freedom, security, happiness, knowledge, and so on are usually
appealed to. We have seen that these often refer indirectly to certain
immediate consequences of cultural practices. But the crucial issue
concerning value hinges upon another meaning of the word "ought"
in which a more remote consequence is implied. Is there a
scientific parallel for this kind of value?
THE SURVIVAL OF A CULTURE
We have seen that in certain respects operant reinforcement
resembles the natural selection of evolutionary theory. Just as genetic
characteristics which arise as mutations are selected or discarded by
their consequences, so novel forms of behavior are selected or
discarded through reinforcement. There is still a third kind of
selection which applies to cultural practices. A group adopts a given
practice— a custom, a manner, a controlling device—either by design
or through some event which, so far as its effect upon the group is
concerned, may be wholly accidental. As a characteristic of the social
environment this practice modifies the behavior of members of the
group. The resulting behavior may affect the success of the group in
competition with other groups or with the nonsocial environment.
Cultural practices which are advantageous will tend to be
characteristic of the groups which survive and which therefore
perpetuate those practices. Some cultural practices may therefore be
said to have survival value, while others are lethal in the genetic
sense.
A given culture is, in short, an experiment in behavior. It is a
particular set of conditions under which a large number of people
grow and live. These conditions generate the patterns or aspects of
behavior—the cultural character—which we have already
examined. The general interest level of members of the group, their
motivations

DESIGNING A CULTURE

431

and emotional dispositions, their behavioral repertoires, and the
extent to which they practice self-control and self-knowledge are all
relevant to the strength of the group as a whole. In addition the
culture has an indirect effect upon other factors. The general health
of the group will depend upon birth rate, hygiene, methods of child
care, general living conditions, and hours and kinds of work, upon
whether many men and women of talent go into medicine and
nursing, and upon what proportion of the wealth of the group goes
into the construction of hospitals, public health services, and so on.
All these conditions, in turn, depend upon the culture. Cultural
practices are also largely responsible for the use which is made of the
genetic material born into the group, since they determine whether
the individual will be able to develop his talents fully, whether
educational institutions will be open to him regardless of class or
other distinction, whether educational policies are progressive or
reactionary, whether he will be subject to political or economic
favoritism in the selection of a profession, and so on. The culture also
determines the extent to which the members of the group are
preoccupied with food or sex or with escape from minor aversive
stimulation in the search for "comfort" or from such major aversive
stimulation as hard labor or combat, as well as the extent to which
they are subject to exploitation by powerful agencies. In turn,
therefore, it determines the extent to which they are able to engage
in productive activities in science, art, crafts, sports, and so on. The
experimental test of a given culture is provided by competition
between groups under the conditions characteristic of a particular
epoch.
Is survival, then, a criterion according to which a given cultural
practice may be evaluated? Those who are accustomed to appealing
to more traditional values are usually not willing to accept this
alternative. Survival value is a difficult criterion because it has perhaps
even less obvious dimensions than happiness, freedom, knowledge,
and health. It is not an unchanging criterion, for what may in this
sense be a "good" culture in one period is not necessarily "good" in
another. Since survival always presupposes competition, if only with
the inanimate environment, it does not appear to define a "good"
culture in the absence of competition. There appears to be no way

432

THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

in which we can test the survival value of a culture in vacua to
determine its absolute goodness. Conversely, the temporary
survival of a culture is no proof of its goodness. All present
cultures have obviously survived, many of them without very great
change for hundreds of years, but this may not mean that they are
better cultures than others which have perished or suffered drastic
modification under more competitive circumstances. The principle
of survival does not permit us to argue that the status quo must be
good because it is here now.
Another difficulty is that survival is often in direct conflict with
traditional values. There are circumstances under which a group is
more likely to survive if it is not happy, or under which it will
survive only if large numbers of its members submit to slavery.
Under certain circumstances the survival of a culture may depend
upon the unrestricted exercise of sexual behavior, while under other
circumstances severely repressive control may strengthen
advantageous behavior of other sorts. In order to accept survival as
a criterion in judging a culture, it thus appears to be necessary to
abandon such principles as happiness, freedom, and virtue.
Perhaps the commonest objection to survival is essentially an
aversive reaction to the practices which have, thus far in the history
of mankind, had survival value. Aggressive action has usually been
most successful in promoting the survival of one group against
another or of one individual against another.
These difficulties appear to explain why those who are
accustomed to the traditional values hesitate to accept survival as
an alternative. We have no reason to urge them to do so. We need
not say that anyone chooses survival as a criterion according to
which a cultural practice is to be evaluated. Human behavior does
not depend upon the prior choice of any value. When a man jumps
out of the way of an approaching car, we may say that he "chooses
life rather than death." But he does not jump because he has so
chosen; he jumps because jumping is evoked by certain stimulating
circumstances. This fact is explained in turn by many earlier
contingencies of reinforcement in which quick movement has
reduced the threat of impending aversive stimulation or has, in the
sense of Chapter XI, avoided aversive consequences. Now, the fact
that the individual responds or can

DESIGNING A CULTURE

433

be conditioned to respond in this way is not wholly unrelated to the
issue of life or death. It is obvious, after the fact, that the behavior
has worked to his advantage. But this particular advantage could not
have operated before he jumped. Only past advantages could have
had an effect upon his behavior. He was likely to jump or to learn to
jump because his ancestors were selected from a large population just
because they jumped or learned to jump quickly from the paths of
moving objects. Those who did not jump or could not learn to jump
are probably not represented by contemporary descendants. The
"value" which the individual appears to have chosen with respect
to his own future is therefore nothing more than that condition
which operated selectively in creating and perpetuating the behavior
which now seems to exemplify such a choice. An individual does not
choose to live or die; he behaves in ways which work toward his
survival or death. Behavior usually leads to survival because the
behaving individual has been selected by survival in the process of
evolution.
In the same sense, the behavior of making a constructive suggestion
about a cultural practice does not involve the "choice of a value."
A long biological and cultural history has produced an individual who
acts in a particular way with respect to cultural conditions. Our
problem is not to determine the value or goals which operate in the
behavior of the cultural designer; it is rather to examine the complex
conditions under which design occurs. Some changes in culture may
be made because of consequences which are roughly described as
happiness, freedom, knowledge, and so on. Eventually, the survival
of the group acquires a similar function. The fact that a given practice
is related to survival becomes effective as a prior condition in cultural
design. Survival arrives late among the so-called values because the
effect of a culture upon human behavior, and in turn upon the
perpetuation of the culture itself, can be demonstrated only when a
science of human behavior has been well developed. The "practice of
changing practice" is accelerated by science just because science
provides an abundance of instances in which the consequences of
practices are shown. The individual who is familiar with the results of
science is most likely to set up comparable conditions in cultural

434

THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

design, and we may say, if the expression will not be misunderstood,
that he is using survival as a criterion in evaluating a practice.
CAN WE ESTIMATE SURVIVAL VALUE?
The evolution of cultures appears to follow the pattern of the
evolution of species. The many different forms of culture which arise
correspond to the "mutations" of genetic theory. Some forms prove
to be effective under prevailing circumstances and others not, and
the perpetuation of the culture is determined accordingly. When we
engage in the deliberate design of a culture, we are, so to speak,
generating "mutations" which may speed up the evolutionary process.
The effect could be random, but there is also the possibility that such
mutations may be especially adapted to survival.
But there is one difficulty and it is a very serious one. Survival will
not have a useful effect upon the behavior of the cultural designer
unless he can actually calculate survival value. A number of current
issues suggest that this is not always possible. We may change the
pattern of family life and of educational institutions so that children
will grow up to be happier people, but are we sure that happy people
are most likely to survive in the world today? The psychotherapist
faces a comparable problem which is best exemplified by the writings
of Freud himself. Freud was, on the one hand, interested in curing
neuroses and, on the other, in demonstrating the importance of the
achievements of neurotic men. Would a group of nonneurotic people
lack scientific and artistic initiative, and if so, could they compete with
a group of moderately neurotic people? Similarly, in governmental
design, it may be possible to give everyone a considerable measure of
security, but will the government which does so then be supported
by an energetic, productive, and inventive people?
Practical situations are almost always more complex than those of
the laboratory since they contain many more variables and often
many unknowns. This is the special problem of technology as against
pure science. In the field of human behavior, particularly in the
design of culture, we must recognize a kind of complexity in the
face of which the rigor of a laboratory science cannot be maintained.
But this does not mean that science cannot contribute to the solution
of

DESIGNING A CULTURE

435

crucial problems. It is in the spirit of science to insist upon careful
observation, the collection of adequate information, and the
formulation of conclusions which contain a minimum of wishful
thinking. All of this is as applicable to complex situations as to simple.
In addition, a rigorous science of human behavior offers the following
kinds of practical help.
A demonstration of basic behavioral processes under simplified
conditions enables us to see these processes at work in complex cases,
even though they cannot be treated rigorously there. If these
processes are recognized, the complex case may be more
intelligently handled. This is the kind of contribution which a pure
science is most likely to make to technology. For example, a
behavioral process frequently occupies a considerable period of time
and often cannot be observed at all through casual observation.
When the process is revealed with proper recording techniques
under controlled conditions, we may recognize it and utilize it in the
complex case in the world at large. Punishment gives quick results,
and casual observation recommends its use, but we may be
dissuaded from taking this momentary advantage if we know that
progress towards a better solution is being made in some alternative
course of action. It is difficult to resist punishing a child for conduct
which it will eventually outgrow without punishment until we have
adequate evidence of the process of growth. Only when
developmental schedules have been carefully established by
scientific investigation are we likely to put up with the
inconvenience of foregoing punishment. The process of extinction
also requires a good deal of time and is not clear to casual inspection.
We are not likely to use the process effectively until the scientific
study of simpler instances has assured us that a given end-state will
indeed be reached. It is the business of science to make clear the
consequences of various operations performed upon a system. Only
when we have seen these consequences clearly set forth are we
likely to be influenced by their counterparts in complex practical
situations.
A rigorous science of behavior makes a different sort of remote
consequence effective when it leads us to recognize survival as a
criterion in evaluating a controlling practice. We have seen that hap-

436

THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

piness, justice, knowledge, and so on are not far removed from
certain immediate consequences which reinforce the individual in
selecting one culture or one practice against another. But just as the
immediate advantage gained through punishment is eventually
matched by later disadvantages, these immediate consequences of
a cultural practice may be followed by others of a different sort. A
scientific analysis may lead us to resist the more immediate
blandishments of freedom, justice, knowledge, or happiness in
considering the long-run consequence of survival.
Perhaps the greatest contribution which a science of behavior
may make to the evaluation of cultural practices is an insistence
upon experimentation. We have no reason to suppose that any
cultural practice is always right or wrong according to some
principle or value regardless of the circumstances or that anyone
can at any given time make an absolute evaluation of its survival
value. So long as this is recognized, we are less likely to seize
upon the hard and fast answer as an escape from indecision, and
we are more likely to continue to modify cultural design in order to
test the consequences.
Science helps us in deciding between alternative courses of
action by making past consequences effective in determining future
conduct. Although no one course of action may be exclusively
dictated by scientific experience, the existence of any scientific
parallel, no matter how sketchy, will make it somewhat more likely
that the more profitable of two courses will be taken. To those who
are accustomed to evaluating a culture in terms of absolute
principles, this may seem inadequate. But it appears to be the best
we can do. The formalized experience of science, added to the
practical experience of the individual in a complex set of
circumstances, offers the best basis for effective action. What is
left is not the realm of the value judgment; it is the realm of
guessing. When we do not know, we guess. Science does not
eliminate guessing, but by narrowing the field of alternative courses
of action it helps us to guess more effectively.

CHAPTER

XXIX

THE PROBLEM OF CONTROL

There are certain rules of thumb according to which
human behavior has long been controlled which make up a species
of pre-scientific craft. The scientific study of behavior has reached
the point where it is supplying additional techniques. As the
methods of science continue to be applied to behavior, we may
expect technical contributions to multiply rapidly. If we may judge
from the application of science to other practical problems, the
effect upon human affairs will be tremendous.
We have no guarantee that the power thus generated will be used
for what now appear to be the best interests of mankind. As the
technology of modern warfare clearly shows, scientists have not
been able to prevent the use of their achievements in ways which
are very far from the original purposes of science. A science of
behavior does not contain within itself any means of controlling
the use to which its contributions will be put. Machiavelli's
prescientific insight into human behavior was dedicated to
preserving the power of a governmental agency. In Nazi Germany
the results of a more exact science were applied to similarly
restricted interests. Can this be prevented? Are we to continue to
develop a science of behavior without
437

438

THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

regard to the use which will be made of it? If not, to whom is the
control which it generates to be delegated?
This is not only a puzzling question, it is a frightening one; for
there is good reason to fear those who are most apt to seize
control. To the suggestion that science would eventually be able to
"control man's thoughts with precision" Winston Churchill once
replied, "I shall be very content if my task in this world is done
before that happens." This is not, however, a wholly satisfactory
disposition of the problem. Other kinds of solutions may be
classified under four general headings.
Denying control. One proposed solution is to insist that man is a
free agent and forever beyond the reach of controlling techniques.
It is apparently no longer possible to seek refuge in that belief. The
freedom which is at issue in the evaluation of governments is
related to the countercontrol of aversive techniques. A doctrine of
personal freedom appeals to anyone to whom the release from
coercive control is important. But behavior is determined in
noncoercive ways; and as other kinds of control are better
understood, the doctrine of personal freedom becomes less and less
effective as a motivating device and less and less tenable in a
theoretical understanding of human behavior. We all control, and
we are all controlled. As human behavior is further analyzed,
control will become more effective. Sooner or later the problem
must be faced.
Refusing to control. An alternative solution is the deliberate
rejection of the opportunity to control. The best example of this
comes from psychotherapy. The therapist is often clearly aware of
his power over the individual who turns to him for help. The
misuse of that power requires, as we have seen, unusual ethical
standards. Carl R. Rogers has written, "One cannot take
responsibility for evaluating a person's abilities, motives, conflicts,
needs; for evaluating the adjustment he is capable of achieving, the
degree of reorganization he should undergo, the conflicts which he
should resolve, the degree of dependence which he should develop
upon the therapist, and the goals of therapy, without a significant
degree of control over the individual being an inevitable
accompaniment. As this process is

THE PROBLEM OF CONTROL

439

extended to more and more persons, as it is for example to thousands
of veterans, it means a subtle control of persons and their values and
goals by a group which has selected itself to do the controlling. The
fact that it is a subtle and well-intentioned control makes it only
less likely that people will realize what they are accepting." * Rogers'
solution is to minimize the contact between patient and therapist to
the point at which control seems to vanish.
Philosophies of government which arise from a similar fear of control
are represented in an extreme form by anarchy and more
conservatively by the doctrine of laisser faire. "He governs best
who governs least." This does not mean that moderate
governmental techniques are especially effective, for if that were true
the moderate government would govern most. It means that a
government which governs least is relatively free from the dangers of
misuse of power. In economics a similar philosophy defends the
normal stabilizing processes of a "free" economy against all forms of
regulation.
To refuse to accept control, however, is merely to leave control in
other hands. Rogers has argued that the individual holds within
himself the solution to his problems and that for this reason the
therapist need not take positive action. But what are the ultimate
sources of the inner solution? If the individual is the product of a
culture in which there is marked ethical and religious training, in which
governmental control and education have been effective, in which
economic reinforcement has worked in an acceptable way, and in
which there is a substantial lay wisdom applicable to personal
problems, he may very well "find a solution," and a therapist may not
be necessary. But if the individual is the product of excessive,
unskillful, or otherwise damaging control, or has received atypical
ethical or religious training, or is subject to extreme deprivations, or has
received powerful economic reinforcements for asocial behavior, no
acceptable solution may be available "within himself." In government
a philosophy of laisser faire is effective if the citizen is in contact with
religious, educational, and other types of agencies, which supply the
control which the government refuses to accept. The program of
anarchy, which argues that man will flourish as soon as governmental
control is withdrawn,
1 Harvard Educational Review, Fall 1948, page 212.

440

THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

usually neglects to identify the other controlling forces which
adapt man to a stable social system. A "free society" is one in
which the individual is controlled by agencies other than
government. The "faith in the common man" which makes a
philosophy of democracy possible is actually a faith in other
sources of control. When the governmental structure of the United
States was being designed, the advocates of a minimal government
could point to effective religious and ethical controls; if these had
been lacking, a program of laisser faire would have left the people
of the country to other controlling agencies with possibly disastrous
results. Similarly, in an uncontrolled economy, prices, wages, and
so on are free to change as functions of variables which are not
arranged by a governmental agency; but they are not free in any
other sense.
To refuse to accept control, and thus to leave control to other
sources, often has the effect of diversifying control. Diversification
is another possible solution to our problem.
Diversifying control. A rather obvious solution is to distribute
the control of human behavior among many agencies which have so
little in common that they are not likely to join together in a
despotic unit. In general this is the argument for democracy against
totalitarianism. In a totalitarian state all agencies are brought
together under a single superagency. A state religion conforms to
governmental principles. Through state ownership the superagency
acquires complete economic control. Schools are used to support
governmental practices and to train men and women according to
the needs of the state, while education which might oppose the
governmental program is prevented through control of speech and
the press. Even psychotherapy may become a function of the state,
as in Nazi Germany, where, because there were no opposing
agencies, extreme measures were adopted.
A unified agency is often said to be more efficient, but it makes
a solution to the problem of control very difficult. It is the
inefficiency of diversified agencies which offers some guarantee
against the despotic use of power. A simple example of the
beneficial effect of diversification is provided by American
advertising. Large sums of money are spent annually to induce
people to purchase particular

THE PROBLEM OF CONTROL

441

brands of goods. A large part of the control attempted by each
company is counteracted by the control attempted by others.
Insofar as advertising is directed toward the choice of brand only,
the net effect is probably slight. If all the money used to promote
particular brands of cigarettes, for example, were devoted to
increasing the number of cigarettes smoked per day regardless of
brand, the effect might well be more marked. This fact is
recognized by industries which pool their advertising funds to
promote a type of product rather than individual brands.
In a democracy there is a similar, but much more important,
canceling out of the effects of control: economic control is often
opposed by education and by governmental restrictions;
governmental and religious control is often opposed by
psychotherapy; there is often some opposition between
government and religion; and so on. So long as the opposing forces
remain in some sort of balance, excessive exploitation by any one
agency is avoided. This does not mean that control is never
misused. Proceeds from control tend to be less conspicuous when
thus divided, and no one agency increases its power to the point at
which the members of the group take alarm. It does not follow,
however, that diversified control does more than diversify the
proceeds.
The great advantage of diversification is not closely related to
the problem of control. Diversification permits a safer and more
flexible experimentation in the design of culture. The totalitarian
state is weak because if it makes a mistake, the whole culture may
be destroyed. Under diversification, new techniques of control
may be tested locally without a serious threat to the whole
structure.
Those who accept diversification as a solution to the problem of
control find it possible to adopt several appropriate measures. One
controlling agency is explicitly opposed to another. Legislation
against monopolistic practices, for example, prevents the
development of the unlimited economic power of a single agency.
It often has the effect of setting up two or three powerful agencies
among which a given sort of economic control is distributed. In
education an explicit diversification is implied in any opposition to
standardized practices. By maintaining many different kinds of
educational institutions,

442

THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

working in different ways and achieving different results, we gain
the advantages of safe experimentation and avoid excessive
emphasis on any one program. In America diversification in
government is exemplified by the coexistence of federal, state, and
local governments, while religious control is distributed among
many sects.
To those who fear the misuse of a science of human behavior
this solution dictates an obvious step. By distributing scientific
knowledge as widely as possible, we gain some assurance that it
will not be impounded by any one agency for its own
aggrandizement.
Controlling control. In another attempt to solve the problem of
control a governmental agency is given the power to limit the
extent to which control is exercised by individuals or by other
agencies. The possibility of controlling men through force, for
example, is all too evident. One strong man governing through
force alone is a small totalitarian state. When the force is
distributed among many men, the advantages of diversification
ensue: there is some cancellation of effect, exploitation is less
conspicuous, and the strength of the group does not depend so
critically upon the continuing strength of one man. But an advance
over the mere diversification of force is achieved by a government
which functions to "keep the peace"—to prevent any sort of
control through the use of force. Such a government may be
extended to other forms of control. In modern democracies, for
example, the man in possession of great wealth is not permitted to
control behavior in all the ways which would otherwise be open to
him. The educator is not permitted to use the controls at his
disposal to establish certain kinds of behavior. Religion and
psychotherapy are not permitted to encourage or condone illegal
behavior. Personal control is restricted by giving the individual
redress against "undue influence."
In this solution to the problem there is no doubt where the
ultimate control rests. But if such a government is to operate
efficiently, it must be assigned superior power, and the problem of
preventing its misuse remains. The problem has apparently been
solved with respect to control through force whenever a government
has successfully kept the peace without otherwise interfering in the
lives of its citizens. But this result is not inevitable. Governments
which are assigned

THE PROBLEM OF CONTROL

443

force in order to keep the peace may use it to control citizens in
other ways and to fight other governments. Other sorts of control
may also be misused. A government which is able to restrict the
control exercised by a particular agency may coerce that agency
into supporting its own program of expansion. The totalitarian
state begins perhaps by merely restricting the control of the
agencies under it, but it can eventually usurp their functions. This
has happened in the past. Does a science of behavior necessarily
make it less likely to happen again?
A POSSIBLE SAFEGUARD
AGAINST DESPOTISM
The ultimate strength of a controller depends upon the strength
of those whom he controls. The wealth of a rich man depends upon
the productivity of those whom he controls through wealth; slavery
as a technique in the control of labor eventually proves
nonproductive and too costly to survive. The strength of a
government depends upon the inventiveness and productivity of its
citizens; coercive controls which lead to inefficient or neurotic
behavior defeat their own purpose. An agency which employs the
stupefying practices of propaganda suffers from the ignorance and
the restricted repertoires of those whom it controls. A culture
which is content with the status quo—which claims to know what
controlling practices are best and therefore does not experiment—
may achieve a temporary stability but only at the price of eventual
extinction.
By showing how governmental practices shape the behavior of
those governed, science may lead us more rapidly to the design of
a government, in the broadest possible sense, which will
necessarily promote the well-being of those who are governed. The
maximal strength of the manpower born to a group usually requires
conditions which are described roughly with such terms as
freedom, security, happiness, and knowledge. In the exceptional
case in which it does not, the criterion of survival also works in the
interests of the governed as well as those of the government. It may
not be purely wishful thinking to predict that this kind of strength
will eventually take first place in the considerations of those who
engage in the design of culture. Such an achievement would
simply represent a special case

444

THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

of self-control in the sense of Chapter XV. It is easy for a ruler, or
the designer of a culture, to use any available power to achieve
certain immediate effects. It is much more difficult to use power to
achieve certain ultimate consequences. But every scientific
advance which points up such consequences makes some measure
of self-control in the design of culture more probable.
Government for the benefit of the governed is easily classified as
an ethical or moral issue. This need not mean that governmental
design is based upon any absolute principles of right and wrong
but rather, as we have just seen, that it is under the control of longterm consequences. All the examples of self-control described in
Chapter XV could also be classified as ethical or moral problems.
We deal with the ethics of governmental design and control as we
deal with the ethics of any other sort of human behavior. For
obvious reasons we call someone bad when he strikes us. Later,
and for as obvious reasons, we call him bad when he strikes others.
Eventually we object in more general terms to the use of physical
force. Countermeasures become part of the ethical practices of our
group, and religious agencies support these measures by branding
the use of physical force immoral or sinful. All these measures
which oppose the use of physical force are thus explained in terms
of the immediate aversive consequences. In the design of
government, we can, however, evaluate the use of physical force by
considering the ultimate effect upon the group. Why should a
particular government not slaughter the entire population of a
captured city or country? It is part of our cultural heritage to call
such behavior wrong and to react, perhaps in a violently emotional
way, to the suggestion. The fact that the members of a group do
react in this way could probably be shown to contribute ultimately
to the strength of the group. But quite apart from such a reaction
we may also condemn such a practice because it would eventually
weaken the government. As we have seen, it would lead to much
more violent resistance in other wars, to organized counterattack
by countries afraid of meeting the same fate, and to very serious
problems in the control of the government's own citizens. In the
same way, although we may object to slavery because aversive
control of one individual is also aversive to others, because

THE PROBLEM OF CONTROL

445

it is "wrong," or because it is "incompatible with our conception of
the dignity of man," an alternative consideration in the design of
culture might be that slavery reduces the effectiveness of those
who are enslaved and has serious effects upon other members of
the group. Similarly, we defend a way of life which we believe to
be superior to others by listing those characteristics which are
immediately reinforcing to us and which we call ethically or
morally good; but in evaluating a particular cultural experiment
we may, instead, ask whether that way of life makes for the most
effective development of those who follow it.
Ethical and moral principles have undoubtedly been valuable in
the design of cultural practices. Presumably those principles which
are with us today have been most valuable in this respect.
However, the ultimate survival value of any given set is not
thereby guaranteed. What science can tell us about the effect of a
given practice upon behavior, and the effect of that behavior upon
the survival of the group, may lead more directly to recognition of
the ultimate strength of government in the broadest sense.
Eventually the question must be asked with respect to mankind in
general. Much has been written recently of the need to return to
"moral law" in deliberations concerning human affairs. But the
question, "Whose moral law?" frequently proves embarrassing.
Faced with the problem of finding a moral law acceptable to all the
peoples of the world, we become more acutely aware of the
shortcomings of the principles proposed by any one group or
agency. The possibility of promoting such principles, either
through education or military conquest, is not promising. If a
science of behavior can discover those conditions of life which
make for the ultimate strength of men, it may provide a set of
"moral values" which, because they are independent of the history
and culture of any one group, may be generally accepted.
WHO WILL CONTROL?
Although science may provide the basis for a more effective
cultural design, the question of who is to engage in such design
remains unanswered. "Who should control?" is a spurious question
—at least until we have specified the consequences with respect to
which it

446

THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

may be answered. If we look to the long-term effect upon the group
the question becomes, "Who should control if the culture is to
survive?" But this is equivalent to asking, "Who will control in the
group which does survive?" The answer requires the kind of
prediction which cannot be made with any certainty because of the
extremely complex circumstances to be taken into account. In the
long run, however, the most effective control from the point of
view of survival will probably be based upon the most reliable
estimates of the survival value of cultural practices. Since a science
of behavior is concerned with demonstrating the consequences of
cultural practices, we have some reason for believing that such a
science will be an essential mark of the culture or cultures which
survive. The current culture which, on this score alone, is most
likely to survive is, therefore, that in which the methods of science
are most effectively applied to the problems of human behavior.
This does not mean, however, that scientists are becoming selfappointed governors. It does not mean that anyone in possession
of the methods and results of science can step outside the stream
of history and take the evolution of government into his own
hands. Science is not free, either. It cannot interfere with the
course of events; it is simply part of that course. It would be quite
inconsistent if we were to exempt the scientist from the account
which science gives of human behavior in general. Science can,
however, supply a description of the kind of process of which it
itself is an example. A reasonable statement of our present position
in the evolution of culture might take this form: We find ourselves
members of a culture in which science has flourished and in which
the methods of science have come to be applied to human
behavior. If, as seems to be the case, the culture derives strength
from this fact, it is a reasonable prediction that a science of
behavior will continue to flourish and that our culture will make a
substantial contribution to the social environment of the future.
THE FATE OF THE INDIVIDUAL
Western thought has emphasized the importance and dignity of
the individual. Democratic philosophies of government, based
upon

THE PROBLEM OF CONTROL

447

the "rights of man," have asserted that all individuals are equal
under the law, and that the welfare of the individual is the goal of
government. In similar philosophies of religion, piety and salvation
have been left to the individual himself rather than to a religious
agency. Democratic literature and art have emphasized the
individual rather than the type, and have often been concerned
with increasing man's knowledge and understanding of himself.
Many schools of psychotherapy have accepted the philosophy that
man is the master of his own fate. In education, social planning,
and many other fields, the welfare and dignity of the individual
have received first consideration.
The effectiveness of this point of view can scarcely be denied.
The practices associated with it have strengthened the individual as
an energetic and productive member of the group. The individual
who "asserts himself" is one to whom the social environment is
especially reinforcing. The environment which has characterized
Western democratic thought has had this effect. The point of view
is particularly important in opposition to despotic control and can,
in fact, be understood only in relation to such control. The first step
in the countercontrol of a powerful agency is to strengthen the
controllee. If the governing agency cannot be made to understand
the value of the individual to the agency itself, the individual
himself must be made to understand his own value. The
effectiveness of the technique is evident in the fact that despotic
governments have eventually been countercontrolled by
individuals acting in concert to build a world which they find more
reinforcing, and in the fact that governing agencies which
recognize the importance of the individual have frequently become
powerful.
The use of such concepts as individual freedom, initiative, and
responsibility has, therefore, been well reinforced. When we turn
to what science has to offer, however, we do not find very
comforting support for the traditional Western point of view. The
hypothesis that man is not free is essential to the application of
scientific method to the study of human behavior. The free inner
man who is held responsible for the behavior of the external
biological organism is only a prescientific substitute for the kinds
of causes which are discovered in the course of a scientific
analysis. All these alternative

448

THE CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR

causes lie outside the individual. The biological substratum itself is
determined by prior events in a genetic process. Other important
events are found in the nonsocial environment and in the culture of
the individual in the broadest possible sense. These are the things
which make the individual behave as he does. For them he is not
responsible, and for them it is useless to praise or blame him. It
does not matter that the individual may take it upon himself to
control the variables of which his own behavior is a function or, in
a broader sense, to engage in the design of his own culture. He
does this only because he is the product of a culture which
generates self-control or cultural design as a mode of behavior. The
environment determines the individual even when he alters the
environment.
This prior importance of the environment has slowly come to be
recognized by those who are concerned with changing the lot of
mankind. It is more effective to change the culture than the
individual because any effect upon the individual as such will be
lost at his death. Since cultures survive for much longer periods,
any effect upon them is more reinforcing. There is a similar
distinction between clinical medicine, which is concerned with the
health of the individual, and the science of medicine, which is
concerned with improving medical practices which will eventually
affect the health of billions of individuals. Presumably, the
emphasis on culture will grow as the relevance of the social
environment to the behavior of the individual becomes clearer. We
may therefore find it necessary to change from a philosophy which
emphasizes the individual to one which emphasizes the culture or
the group. But cultures also change and perish, and we must not
forget that they are created by individual action and survive only
through the behavior of individuals.
Science does not set the group or the state above the individual
or vice versa. All such interpretations derive from an unfortunate
figure of speech, borrowed from certain prominent instances of
control. In analyzing the determination of human conduct we
choose as a starting point a conspicuous link in a longer causal
chain. When an individual conspicuously manipulates the variables
of which the behavior of another individual is a function, we say
that the first individual controls the second, but we do not ask who
or what controls the first.

THE PROBLEM OF CONTROL

449

When a government conspicuously controls its citizens, we
consider this fact without identifying the events which control the
government. When the individual is strengthened as a measure of
counter-control, we may, as in democratic philosophies, think of
him as a starting point. Actually, however, we are not justified in
assigning to anyone or anything the role of prime mover. Although
it is necessary that science confine itself to selected segments in a
continuous series of events, it is to the whole series that any
interpretation must eventually apply.
Even so, the conception of the individual which emerges from a
scientific analysis is distasteful to most of those who have been
strongly affected by democratic philosophies. As we saw in
Chapter I, it has always been the unfortunate task of science to
dispossess cherished beliefs regarding the place of man in the
universe. It is easy to understand why men so frequently flatter
themselves—why they characterize the world in ways which
reinforce them by providing escape from the consequences of
criticism or other forms of punishment. But although flattery
temporarily strengthens behavior, it is questionable whether it has
any ultimate survival value. If science does not confirm the
assumptions of freedom, initiative, and responsibility in the
behavior of the individual, these assumptions will not ultimately be
effective either as motivating devices or as goals in the design of
culture. We may not give them up easily, and we may, in fact, find
it difficult to control ourselves or others until alternative principles
have been developed. But the change will probably be made. It
does not follow that newer concepts will necessarily be less
acceptable. We may console ourselves with the reflection that
science is, after all, a cumulative progress in knowledge which is
due to man alone, and that the highest human dignity may be to
accept the facts of human behavior regardless of their momentary
implications.

INDEX
Absenteeism, 390
Absent-minded conduct, 289
Absolution, 354
Abstraction, 134ff., 277
Abulia, 71, 77, 103, 386
Accidental contingencies. See
Superstition
Accidents, 367, 378
Achievement, sense of, 72
Acquired drives, 152
Acquitted, 317
Acting, 120
Activity, 155
Acts, 93
Adaptation of emotional effects,
208
Adjustment, personal, 373
Adventures of the Black Girl in her
Search for God, 50f.
Advertising, diversified control in,
441
Aesop, 7
Affection, as generalized reinforcer,
78
Age, as independent variable, 156
Agencies. See Controlling agencies
Aggressiveness, 200, 202, 302, 373
Agoraphobia, 166
Aid, physical. See Physical
restraint
Alcohol, 152, 230, 237, 320, 363f.
Alcoholism, cures for, 56, 173f., 236
Algebraic summation, 218f.; in selfcontrol, 240
Allergy, 363
Alliteration, 212
Allport, Gordon W., 194
Amusement, 163
Analgesics, 237
Analysis, functional, 35ff.; of
complex cases, 204-224; of
stimuli, 130ff.
Anarchy, 439
Anesthesia, hysterical, 365
Anesthetics, 237
Anger, 160f., 362
Animal research, 38
Annoying consequences, 82

Annoying stimuli, 171
Anorexia, 148
Anthropology, 15, 16, 415
Anticipation, 126f., 180
Anti-social personality, 287
Anxiety, 168, 178-181, 362, 374;
and anticipation, 180; not a
cause, 180f.
Aphasia, hysterical, 365
Aphrodisiacs, 237
Appetizers, 237
Approval, as generalized
reinforcer, 78
Archeology, 15
Aristotle, 373
Art, and fantasy, 271; as reinforcer,
75, 270; emotion in, 169; in
personal control, 315
Art, creative, 253f.
Artistic training, 118
Assault, 339
Association of ideas, 279f.
Assonance, 212
Astrology, 24
Atheism, 360
Atoms of behavior, 94
Attention, 122ff.
Attention as generalized reinforcer,
78
Audience, the nonpunishing, in
psychotherapy, 370
Authority, justification by appeal
to, 328
Automatic writing, 289
Aversion, 171-175; and deprivation,
172
Aversive self-stimulation, 366
Aversive stimuli, conditioned,
173fL; in personal control, 317;
in recall, 245; in self-control,
236; supplementing fixed-interval
reinforcement in industry, 388
Avoidance, 176ff,
Awareness, 88; lack of, 288ff.
"Bad," defined, 324
Barbara celarent, 250
451

452

INDEX

Barchester Towers, 223
Bargain, 394 Barter,
393 Beauty, 417f.
Behavior, as scientific subject matter,
14 Blackmail, 393
Blame, 351
Blends, 213
Boasting, 275, 366
Body types, 25
Bonus, 389
Boredom, 362
Boyle's Law, 204
Bravado, 366
Breathing, 115
Bribe, 393
Bridgman, P. W., 12
Briggs, Dean, 211
Buridan's ass, 244
Butler, Samuel, 5, 137
Buying and selling, 39 3f.
By-products of control of behavior,
359; emotional, 361f.; operant,
363f.
Caffeine, 237
Cannon, W. B., 142
Capital, 400
Capital punishment, 343
Carroll, Lewis, 213
Case history, 15, 18
Casual observation, 37
Catching someone's eye, 303
Catharsis, 373
C a u s e s o f b e h a v i o r, 2 3 f f . ;
conceptual, 31; inner, 27ff.;
neural, 27ff.; popular, 23ff.;
psychic, 29ff.
Censorship, 354
Chaining, 224
"Chance," 136
Chess, 219, 274
Chesterfield, Lord, 321
"Choosing a value," 432
Churchill, W., 438
Civil disobedience, 360
Clans as behaving units, 311
Claustrophobia, 166
Clinical observations, 37
Clinical psychology, 16, 368; and
the environment, 129
Cloister, 354
Cocaine, 320

Codes, legal, 338f.
Coleridge, 45
Color, as property of stimuli, 133
Color-blind, 269
Combined ratio and interval
schedule, 300f., 389
Command, 338; self-, 236f.
Competition, 311, 323
Complex, 146
Complex cases, analysis of,
204-224
Composing, 270
Compulsions, 364
Conceptual causes, 31
Conditioned reflexes, 50-58, 279;
motivation in, 149; practical use
of, 56ff.; range of, 56ff.
Conditioned Reflexes, 53
Conditioned reflex theory, 56
Conditioned reinforcers, 76
Conditioning,
operant. See
Operant conditioning
Conditioned seeing, 266-270
Conditioning, respondent or
Pavlovian. See Respondent
conditioning
Confession, 367
Conflict, 218, 242, 374
Conforming behavior, 416f.
Congenital defects, 269
Conscience, 284, 356f.
Consent of the governed, 336
Consequences of behavior, 59
Contingencies
of reinforcement,
84f., 108f.; pointing up, 319
Continuity of behavior, 91ff.
Continuity of memory, 288
Control, control of, 442; denial of,
438; diversification of, 440;
group, 323-329; implicit in a
functional analysis, 227; problem
of, 437-446; refusal of, 438
Controlling agencies, 333ff.
Controlling environment, 129-140
Cooperation, 306, 311
Copernican theory, 7
Coughing, 115
Countercontrol,
321, 447; of
government, 346fL; of religion,
358; of psychotherapy, 383; of
education, 411
Counterirritant, 171
Covert behavior, 263f., 282, 288

INDEX

Cradle board, 425
Credit, 396
Crime and Punishment, 366
Cross-modal induction, 136
Crystal ball, 251
Culte du moi, 287
Cultural character, 424f.
Culture, 419; design of, 426-436
Culture and control, 415-425
Cursing, 318
Customs, 415
Cyclic changes in behavior, 155f.
Damning, 318
Dancing, 120, 305
Dante, 353
Dare, in personal control, 174, 317
Darwin, Charles, 7, 59, 250
Deaf-mutes, 282
Deafness, functional, 365
Death penalty, 343
Decision, making a, 242ff.
Delay in discriminative
contingencies, 126
Deliberate action, 11 Of., 342f., 428
Deliberate control, 313
Deliberation, 244
Delight, 127
Delinquent behavior, 284
Delusions, 366
Demand, 308
Dependent variable, 23, 35
Depression, 165, 362
Deprivation, and aversion, 172; and
satiation, 141-159; in control of a
"self," 285; in control of operant
behavior, 68; in economic control,
394; in personal control, 319; in
problem solving, 252; in
psychotherapy, 369; in religious
control, 354; in self-control, 234f.
Descartes, Rene, 46f., 248
Designing a culture, 426-436
Desire, 146
Despotism, a possible safeguard
against, 443
Determining tendency, 62
Deterrent, punishment as a, 340, 342
Developmental schedules, 156
Deviant behavior, 417

453

Devil, 357, 374
Diagnosis, 368
Differential reinforcement,
95-06, 389f., 407f.
Discouragement, in
extinction,
72, 77
Discrimination. See Operant
discrimination
Discriminative behavior, responses to
one's own, 264ff.
Discriminative repertoires, 116-122
Discriminative stimuli, 107; use of,
109f.; in controlling a "self," 285
Dismissal, threat of, 388
Disobedience, civil, 360
Displacement, 362, 377
Disposition, 169
Distortion of verbal behavior, 212
Diversification of control, 440
Divine Law, 341
Domination, 153
Doodling, 251, 254
Dostoevski, 366
Drawing from copy, 117f.
Dread, 362
Dreams, day, 271-276 passim, 377
Dreams, while asleep, 293, 368, 377
Drill, 402
Drinking, 31, 141f.
Drive, 143ff.; in conditioned
responses, 149; interrelated, 152f.;
not a physiological state, 145; not a
psychic state, 145; not a stimulus,
144f.; not simply a state of
strength, 146; practical use of, 146;
questions concerning, 148-154;
strongest, 154
Drug addiction, 152, 363f.
Drugs, and emotion, 169; and
motivation, 147; effect upon
personality, 286; effect upon selfknowledge, 290; in personal
control, 320; in psychotherapy,
374; in religious control, 355; in
self-control, 237
Dualism, 29, 258
Duty, 190
Dynamic symmetry, 254
Dynamisms, Freudian, 375, 376-378
Echoic behavior, 210 Economic
agency, the, 400

454

INDEX

Economic control, 384-401; countercontrol of, 400f.
Economic man, 399
Economics, 39 8f.
Economic
value, of goods, 394; of
labor, 391
Education, 402-412
Educational agency, the, 40 3f.;
techniques of, 403ff.; countercontrol
of, 411
Educational reinforcers, 80
Effect, 23
Effect, Law of, 60
Ego, 29, 284
Elation, 180
Elements of response, 94
Elicitation, 64
Embarrassment, 163f.
Emission vs. elicitation, 102
Emotion, 160-170, 261; and culture,
422; and intellect, 209; as
predisposition, 162; in control of a
"self," 285; in extinction, 69; in
personal control, 320; in self-control,
235f.; language of, 259; not a cause,
167f.; operations in field of, 264;
practical use of, 169f.
Empathy, 301
End-organs, 131
English Law, 341
Entertainment, as reinforcement, 75,
315; emotion in, 169; thinking in,
253f.
Environment, the controlling, 129-140;
importance of, 129
Episodes, social, 304-311
Episodes, verbal, 307f.
Equilibrium, 142, 328
Erewhon, 5
Escape, 171, 359
Ethical control. See Group control
Ethical issues in governmental design,
444
Ethics, 328
Ethnology, 15
Etymology, 136
Evolutionary explanation, 54, 83, 90,
141f., 163f., 173
Excitatory potential, 62
Exercise, in education, 402
Exercise, physical, 142

Exhibitionism, 78
Exorcism, 374
Expectancy, 126f.
Experience, 36, 276
Experimental science, contributions off
to practice, 435
Expiation, 354
Expression of emotion, 161
Exteroceptive stimuli, 261
Extinction, 53, 58, 69-72; in self
control, 238
Extra-economic factors in industry, 39f
Eye movements, 123
Factors, 203
Families, as behaving units, 311
Fantasy, 271-276 passim, 377
Fate of the individual, 446
Fatigue, reflex, 48
Favor, 170, 309
Fear, 160f., 361f.
Feed-back, 59, 67, 78, 83, 96
Feelings, 82
Fencing, 121
Field observations, 37
Fixed-interval reinforcement, 100, 387
Fixed-ratio reinforcement, 102, 385
Flexion reflex, 54
Fly, orbit of a, 20
Folie du doute, 220, 244
Folk etymology, 213
Following, leading and, 305, 425
Forgetting, 71, 192, 378
Forgiveness, 317
Formal probe, 214f., 245
Formal prompt, 213f.
Formal suggestion, 213f.
Freedom, as justifying governmental
control, 348, 430, 447; threat to, 6;
under economic control, 391
Free economy, 439
Free society, 440
Free will, 116
Frequency of behavior, 62
Freudian concepts, 29, 152. See also
names of specific concepts
Freudian forgetting, 222
Freudian slip, 378
Freud, Sigmund, 12, 30, 132, 153, 184,

200, 223, 284f., 293, 357, 365,
367.
370, 374L, 434

INDEX

Friendly behavior, 302
Friendship, 309
Frustration, 164f., 200, 202, 207f.
Functional analysis, 35ff.
Functional deafness, 365
Functional relation, 23
Function vs. aspect, 194-203
Galton, Francis, 268, 273
Gambling, schedules of reinforcement
in, 104, 396f.
Generalization. See Induction
Generalized reinforcers. See Reinforcers
Ghandi, 360 Goal, 87-90
Golden Rule, 310
"Good," defined, 324
Goods, 384
Governmental agencies, 335-349; countercontrol of, 346; justification of,
348f.; opposed by psychotherapy,
371f.; techniques of, 336ff., 345f.
Government and Law, 338-341
Gradient, generalization or induction,
133
Grandeur, delusions of, 366
Gratuities, 317, 320
Greatest good of the greatest number,
328
Gresham's Law. 297f.
Grief, 160
Group, as behaving unit, 31 If.
Group control, 323-329
Group mind, 311
Groups, behavior of people in, 296,
297-312 passim
Guilt, 187f., 238, 337
Guitry, Sacha, 360
Habits, breaking bad, 234f.
Habit strength, 62
Habitual behavior, 289
Hallucination, 269, 365f.
Hamlet, 40, 223
Handel, 137
Happiness, 328, 430
Hardness, scale of, 198
Harvey, William. 255
Heaven, 352f.
Hell, 352f.
Heredity, 26

455

Hermit, 359
Hindu religious practices, 354
Hint, 214
Historical knowledge, 408f.
Hitler, 40
Homeostasis, 142
Human bondage, 300
Human nature, 421
Hunger, 143
Hunger pangs, 144, 172
Hush money, 393
Hysterical anesthesia, 365
Hysterical illness, 381
Hysterical paralysis, 365
Id, 29, 284f.
Idea, 276, 279
"Idea," having an, 252f.
Ideas, originality in, 254ff.
Identical elements, 94
Identification, 216f., 377
Ignorance of the law, 339
Illegal behavior, 337
Illness, feigning, 78
Image, 276f., 281f.
Imitation, 119ff., 210, 304, 311, 316,
395
Immoral behavior, 352f.
Incentive, 87
Incentive pay, 389
Incipient behavior, 263
Incompatible effects of variables, 218
Independent variable, 23, 35
Indeterminacy, principle of, 17
Individual differences, 75, 156ff., 195f.,
422
Individual, fate of the, 446ff.
Individual, uniqueness of, 18
Induction, 152f.; cross-modal, 136;
response, 93-95; stimulus, 132ff.

Inferno, 353

Inhibitions, 191, 365, 423
Ink blots, 251, 271

Innate behavior, 26, 111, 114, 119, 156
Installment buying, 396
Instinct, 157. See also Innate behavior
Instinct of the herd, 311
Institutions, educational, 404
Instruction, 410
Intellectual behavior and emotion, 209

456

INDEX

Intelligence, 202
Intelligence tests, 197f.
Intensity of response, 97
Intention, 36

Interaction, unstable social, 308f.

Interest, as effect of reinforcement, 72,
74, 77, 106, 422
Intermittent reinforcement, 70, 79, 99f.
Interoceptive stimuli, 261
Interpretation of behavior, 88; of
stimuli, 138
Interval reinforcement, 100ff.
Interviews, 368
Intraverbal behavior, 210
Introspection, 269, 287
Introspective psychology, 29, 260
Introversion, 287

Intuition, 301
Inventory of behavior, 196f.

Involuntary behavior. See Voluntary
behavior

I.Q., 198
Irrational behavior, 55
Itch, 259

James-Lange theory of emotion, 160
James, William, 160
Joy, 127, 163, 180
Judeo-Christian theology, 284
Jurisprudence, 338f.

Justice, 342, 348
Justification
of practices, of
governmental control, 348f.; of
group control, 328; of religious
control, 358f.
Kinsey, A. C., 196, 199
Knee jerk, 49
.Knowledge, 140, 261, 430; maximized
in education, 408; of consequences,
343
Laboratory research, 16, 37
Laisser faire, 439f.
Lana, Francesco, 3
Lange, C. G., 160
Latency, 48
Law, 338-341; effect upon controllee,
339f.; effect upon controlling
agency,
340f.
Law, government and, 333-349
Law of Effect, 60, 206

Lawrence, D. H., 234
Leading and following, 305, 425
Learning, 59-65
Learning curves, 59ff.
Legal behavior, 337
Leonardo da Vinci, 40
Lie-detector, 161, 187, 325
Linnaean classification, 250
Literature, and fantasy, 270, 377; as
reinforcer, 75; emotion in, 169; in
personal control, 315; thinking in,
253f.
Lodge, Sir Oliver, 19
Logic, 250
Loneliness, 165
Looking, behavior of, 89
Lookout, 123
Love, 162, 310
Lovesickness, 165
Luck, 352
Mach, Ernst, 13
Machiavelli, 321, 437
Machines and living organisms, 46ff.
Magic, 350
Magnus, R., 224
Maintenance of behavior, 98-106
Malingering, 378, 381
Man a machine, 46
Manipulation of a culture, 427
Manipulation of variables, 37
Mannerisms, 289
Manners, 415
Martyrdom, 82
Masochism, 82, 367
Mathematics, 250
Maturation, 156
Maxima and minima, 329, 348, 358,
399, 408

Meaning, multiple, 210
Meaning of response, 36, 88
Memory, repressed, 374
Mendelyeev, 250
Menstrual cycles, 155
Mental arithmetic, 273
Mental events, 276
Mental fatigue, 422
Mental health, 373
Metaphor, 133, 253
Migratory behavior, 156
Military research, 37

INDEX

Military, the, 335f.
Mimicry, 119
Miser, 151
Models, scientific, 14
Modesty, 354, 420
Money, as reinforcer, 79, 384; in
circulation, 296f.
Mood, 169; in self-control, 236
Moodiness, 362
Moral behavior, 352f.
Morale as effect of reinforcement, 72,
77; as emotion, 320
Moral issues in governmental design,
444
Moral law, 445
Morphine, 152, 237, 320
Moslem religion, 9, 354
Motivation, 143; as product of culture,
422
Multiple causes, 209-217; practical use
of, 213
Multiple effects of a single variable,
205-209
Multiple meaning, 210
Multiple personalities, 284f., 374
Multiple variables in perception, 218
Music, 293, 314
Narcissism, 202
National character, 311
Nations, as behaving units, 311
Natural vs. social science, 297
Nausea, conditioned, 174
Need for generalized reinforcers, 80
Need for punishment, 238
Need-gratification, 206
Needs, 143ff.
Negative hallucination, 365
Negative probabilities of response,
222
Negative reinforcers, 73, 185
Nervousness, 364
Nervous system, 27, 281
Neural causes of behavior, 27
Neurology, 27
Neuropsychiatric disorders, 28
Neurosis, 373
Neurotic behavior, 373f., 423
Newton, Isaac, 11
Nicotine, 56, 152, 237
Nonconforming behavior, 418

457

Nonpunishing audience in
psychotherapy, 370

Nostalgia, 55, 165, 270

Novelists, 303
Nuisance value, 300, 393
Numbers, calling a random series of,
211
Numerology, 24
Obedience, 338, 356
Obsessions, 364
Occam's razor, 280
Occupational therapy, 72
Odbert, H. S., 194
Old Adam, 284f.
"Old maid's neurosis," 217
Operant, 65
Operant behavior, 59-90; as voluntary
behavior, 11 Of.; control of, 68
Operant conditioning, 62-69; and deprivation, 149; in personal control, 317;
in psychotherapy, 369; in selfcontrol, 237f.
Operant discrimination, 107-128, 134.
261
Operant extinction, 69ff.
Operant seeing, 270
Operationism, 281f.
Originality in ideas, 254
Oscillation in behavior, 219, 220, 244
"Ought," 429f.
"Oversimplification," 204f.
Pacing of behavior, 388f.
Paralysis, 361, 365
Passive resistance, 360
Paul, St., 354
Pavlovian conditioning. See Respondent
conditioning
Pavlov, I. P., 50f., 65, 266
Perceiving, 140
Percept, 276
Perception, 210, 218, 267
Perceptual world, 138
Periodicity in behavior, 155
Perjury, 339
Persecution, delusions or, 366
Personal adjustment, 373
Personal control, 313-322
Personality, 284f.
Persuasion, 243

458

INDEX

Phantasy. See Fantasy
Phobias, 166, 361f.
Physical restraint and aid, 231f., 315,

318, 354, 360

Physiology, 27, 54; of sensation, 280f.
Physique, 25
Piecework pay, 102, 300
Piety, 358
Pigeon experiments, 66f., 120, 122f.,
126, 1321., 208, 306
Pious behavior, 354
Playing music by ear, 118f.
Pleasant consequences as
reinforcing,
81
Police, 335f.
Politics, practical, 336
Polls, opinion, 20
Positive reinforcers, 73, 185
Possession, demonic, 374
Postural reflexes, 49
Practice, in education, 402
Precurrent behavior, 76
Predator and prey, 304
Predictions in terms of traits, 199ff.
Predispositions to behave, 62
Preparatory set, 128
Prepotency, 220f., 290; in self-control,
239
Prey, predator and, 304
Pride in one's work, 390
Private events in a natural science, 257282; made public, 282
Probability of behavior, 32, 62
Probes, 213, 243, 245, 250
Problems and solutions, 246-252
Problems in stimulus control, 136ff.
Problem solving, 246-252; private,

273

Production lines, 388
Progressive education, 406f.
Prohibition, 354
Projection, 216f., 365f., 378
Projective techniques, 210, 216, 274,

289, 368

Prompts, 213f., 243
Propaganda, 315
Proprioceptive stimuli, 261
"Protection," 393
Protestant reform, 360
Psychic causes, 29
Psychic events, 276

Psychoanalysis, 201, 287, 375. See also
Freud and Freudian concepts
Psychograph, 201
Psychopathic personality, 284
Psychosomatic illness, 191, 363
Psychotherapy, 359-383; as a
controlling agency, 367; as problem
solving, 381f.; in lieu of
governmental punishment, 344; in
opposition to governmental and
religious control, 371f.
Psychotic behavior, 380 Public events.
See Private events
Punishment, 182-193; alternatives to,
191ff.; conflict generated by, 221;
effects of, 183f.; governmental use
of, 337; government defined in terms
of, 335; in personal control, 318;
in self-control, 238f.; need for, 239;
self-, 378; therapy for effects of
excessive, 370; trends away from,
192, 345; unfortunate by-products
of, 190ff.
Purgation, 373
Purity, 420
Purpose, 87-90
Races, as behaving units, 311
Racial types, 26
Rage, 160f., 362
Rate of responding, reinforcement at
specified, 105f.
Rationalization, 292, 366, 377
Ratio reinforcement, 102ff.
Reaction formation, 357, 365, 376
Reaction time experiment, 126
Reader, 212
Reasoning, 246f.
Recall, 24 5f.
Receptors, 281
Reflex action, 47f.; range of, 49f.
Reflexes, 45-50, 111; in emotion, 166,
169; in personal control, 316; in selfcontrol, 233f.
Reinforcement, 53, 65, 72fL; and
deprivation, 149; at specified rates of
responding, 105L; delayed, 125;
determining a "self," 255; in
economic control, 284f.; in
education, 405; in personal control,
317; in psychotherapy, 380fL; in selfcontrol, 237; intermittent, 99f. See
also Con-

INDEX

ditioned reinforcers, Differential
reinforcement, Interval
reinforcement, Negative reinforcers,
Operant conditioning, Positive
reinforcers, Ratio reinforcement,
Variable-interval reinforcement,
Variable-ratio reinforcement
Reinforcers, 72-75; conditioned, 76f.;
generalized, 77-81; generalized, and
deprivation, 150. See also Positive
reinforcers and Negative reinforcers
Relations, responses to, 137f.
Religion, 350-358
Religious control, 350ff.; behavior
resulting from, 355ff.; countercontrol
of, 358; justification of, 358; opposed
by psychotherapy, 371f.; techniques
of, 352
Repertoire, 422
Repressed wishes and memories, 374
Repression, 189, 290ff., 376; therapy
for, 370
Request, 308
Resentment, 362
Resistance, 371
Resolution, 237
Respondent (or Pavlovian)
conditioning, 65, 76; temporal
relations in, 125
Response, 47
Responsibility, personal, 240, 341f,
447
Restraint, physical.
See Physical
restraint
Retribution, 341f.
Revolt, 359
Revolution, political, 360
Reward, 59-66 passim, 185
Rhyme, 212
Rhythm, 212
"Right," as reinforcer, 182
"Right,"
defined, ?24; extended to
customs and manners, 417f; in group
control, 324
Rights, human, 349, 447
Robbery, 339
Robespierre, 40
Robinson Crusoe, 198
Rogers, Carl R., 438f.
Rorschach test, 274
Rules of conduct, 339

459

Rumford, Count, 52
Russian character, 424
Sailors, amusements of, 309
Salvation, in justifying religious practices, 358
Sarton, George, 11
Satan, 233, 357
Satiation. See Deprivation
Satisfying consequences as reinforcing
81
Schedules, developmental, 156
Schedules of reinforcement, 94-106
385f., 396; in the social
environment, 299
Science, characteristics of, 12; misuse
of, 3
Science of behavior, 11
Science of human behavior, objection
to, 17ff.
Sculpture, 293
Season of birth, 24
Security, 348, 391, 430
Seeing, as response, 140; conditioned
266-270; operant, 270-275
Self-control, 227-241; and culture
423; furthered by religious agencies
356f.; in therapy, 380; private, 275;
techniques of, 231-240
Self-determination, 227ff., 242
Self-knowledge, 261; absence of, 288ff.;
and culture, 423; defective, 366
Self-observation, 260f.
Self, the, 283-294; as an organized
system of responses, 285; relation to
other selves, 286; unity of, 285f.
Sensation, 276f.; operational definition
of, 280f.; physiology of, 280f.
Sensing, 140
Sensory processes, 131
Set, preparatory, 128
Sexual behavior, 142, 153, 187, 235,
272, 292f.; control of, 420f.
Sexual reinforcement, 84
Shame, in group control, 325; in
personal control, 174, 187, 317
Shaping behavior, 91-98
"Sharp," 136
Shaw, G. B., 50f.
Sheldon, W. H., 25
Shell shock, 28

460

INDEX

Sheltered life, 354
Shock therapy, 374
"Should." See "Ought"
Shyness, 365
Sibling rivalry, 376

Silence, putting on, 318
Sinful behavior, 352f.
Singing by ear, 118f.
Sin, sense of, 187, 353f.
Sit-down strike, 360

Skill, 96, 407
Skinner, B. F., 210
Sleep, 155, 290
Slip, Freudian, 378

Slow-down, 360
Smile, dimensions of a, 301
Smooth muscles, 49
Sneeze, 111
Snubbing, 318
Social behavior, 297-312
Social conscience, 287
Social environment, 255, 298ff., 419
Social episodes, 304-311
Social forces, 36, 297
Social reinforcement, 298ff.
Social psychology, 16
Social science, 297
Social stimuli, 301ff.
Social systems, 304f., 335
Sociology, 15, 16, 415
Solutions in psychotherapy, 382
Solutions to a problem, 247
Soporifics, 237
Sorrow, 163
Species differences, 75, 156ff.
Sphincter control, 115
Spontaneity, 48

Stalking, 304
Stamping in, 60ff.
Stamping out, 182
Statistics, 19
Stimuli, analysis of, 130ff.;
interpretation of 138ff.; private, 261
Stimulus, 47
Stimulus control, defective, 365;
traditional problems in, 136ff.
Stimulus manipulation, in making a
decision, 243f.; in personal control,
316f.; in problem solving, 249f.; in
religious control, 354; in self-control,
233f.

Stimulus-response formulae, 110
Stimulus substitution, 53
Story of a Cheat, 380
Strikes, 360
Striped muscles, 49
Stubbornness, 360
Style, 118, 304, 416
Sublimation, 152, 377
Subjective terms, 259
Submissiveness, as generalized reinforcer, 79
Sucking behavior, 373
Sugar as reinforcer, 84
Sugar-coating the pill, 233
Suggestion, 210, 213
Suicide, 223, 232
Sulking, 262
Summation, algebraic, 218f.
Summator. See Verbal summator
Superego, 29, 284
Superstitution, 55, 84ff., 350f.
Surgery in psychotherapy, 374
Survival of a culture, 430f.
Survival value, of a culture, 434; of
reflexes, 54f. See also Evolutionary
explanation
Swaddling, 425
Syllogism, 250
Symbolism, 292f.
Symbols, 130, 132, 292ff.
Sympathy, 163
Symptoms, 56, 363, 373, 378f.
Synesthesia, 268
System, scientific, 14
Taciturnity, 365
Taste, 417 Tear
jerker, 56, 169
Teasing, 299f.
Temporal relations between
stimulus, response, and
reinforcement, 125-128
Temptation, 233, 357
Tendencies to behave, 62
Tennis, 121
Tests, 196f., 368
Thematic probe, 215f.
Thematic prompt, 214, 245
Thematic suggestion, 213
Theories of human behavior, 333f.
Theory of the Leisure Class, 417
Therapy. See Psychotherapy

INDEX

Thinking, 242-256, 273, 411
Thoreau, H. D., 360
Thorndike, E. L., 59f., 84, 183, 392
Thought, 276
Threat, 177
Thrill-seeking, 364
Tickle, 259
Time, as independent variable, 154ff.
Timidity, 164
Tobacco "cures," 56, 152, 236
Token reinforcers, 79
Totalitarian government, 21
Tolstoi, 18f.
Tone-deaf, 269
Toothache, 259
Topographical subdivisions of behavior
as "selves," 285
Topography of behavior, 93f.
Traits, 193ff.; not causes, 202;
prediction in terms of, 199ff.
Transfer. See Induction
Trial and error learning, 64
Trollope, Anthony, 223
Truth serums, 320
Ulcers, 168, 363
Unconscious behavior, 111, 289
Unconscious thought, 252f.
Units of behavior, 94
Universality, 315
Unpleasant consequences, 81
Unpleasant stimuli, 171
Unstable social interaction, 308f.
Utopian thinking, 427
Value, economic, 39If., 394f.
Value judgments, 428
Vandalism, 360
Variable-interval reinforcement, 102,
389
Variable-ratio reinforcement, 104, 389,
396f.
Variables controlling behavior, 31-35;
with incompatible effects, 218

461

Veblen, Thorstein, 417
Vegetarianism, 235
Verbal behavior, 94, 95, 97, 210, 299,
408; c-overt, 264
Verbal Behavior, 210 (footnote)
Verbal episodes, 307f.
Verbal report, 280, 282
Verbal responses to private events, 258261
Verbal summator, 215, 274, 289, 291
Virtue, 358
Virtuous behavior, 352f. Volition, 11 Of.
Voluntary behavior, 110-116, 342f.
Wages, 385f.
Wants, 143f.

War and Peace, 18

Watt, James, 255
Wealth, 384
Wells, H. G., 50, 132
Wetterhorn, 137
Whittington, Dick, 214
Will power, 241
Will. See Voluntary behavior

Wish, 146, 374

Wish, repressed, 184
Wit, 377
Witchcraft, 351
Withdrawal symptoms, 364

Women in Love, 234

World within one's skin, 257; study
of, 280
Word association experiments, 210, 215
Word pictures, 270
Wordsworth, 45
Work level, 422
Worry, 168, 362
Writers' cramp, 72
Writing, 254, 270, 274, 315
"Wrong," as reinforcer, 182
"Wrong," defined, 324; extended to
customs and manners, 417f.; in group
control, 32 5f.

