THE TECHNOLOGY OF TEACHING

THE TECHNOLOGY OF TEACHING

BY
B. F. SKINNER

Copyright © 1968 by Meredith Corporation
Copyright © 2003 by B. F. Skinner Foundation
www.bfskinner.org
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means without
permission in writing from the publisher.
ISBN 978-0-9964539-2-9 (epub)
B. F. Skinner Foundation Reprint Series
Edited by Julie S. Vargas
p. 9: B. F. Skinner, “The Science of Learning and the Art of Teaching,” Harvard Educational
Review, 24:2 (Spring 1954), pp. 86-97. Copyright © 1954 by the President and Fellows of
Harvard College. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
p. 29: “Teaching Machines” by B. F. Skinner. First appeared in Science, October 24, 1958, Vol.
128, pp. 968-977.
p. 59: “The Technology of Teaching” by B. F. Skinner. Reprinted by permission from
Proceedings of the Royal Society, B, 1965, Vol. 162, pp. 427-443.
p. 93: “Why Teachers Fail” by B. F. Skinner, The Saturday Review, October 16, 1965. Reprinted
with permission from General Media International, Inc.

To a teacher
Miss Mary I. Graves
(1863-1922)

Acknowledgments for this e-book version
The B. F. Skinner Foundation would like to thank the Association for
Behavior Analysis International (ABAI) for the encouragement and
financial support that made this electronic format possible.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Four of the chapters in this book have already been published. Chapter
2 was read at a conference at the University of Pittsburgh on March 12,
1954, and published in the Harvard Educational Review, 1954, Vol.
24, No. 2, pp. 86–97 and in Current Trends in Psychology and the
Behavioral Sciences, University of Pittsburgh Press, 1954. Chapter 3
was published in Science, October 24, 1958, Vol. 128, pp. 969–977.
Chapter 4 was given as a Review Lecture at the Royal Society in
London on November 19, 1964, and published in the Proceedings of
the Royal Society, B, 1965, Vol. 162, pp. 427–443. Chapter 5 was read
before the Philosophy of Education Society in April, 1965, and
published in The Saturday Review, October 16, 1965. Permission to
reprint these chapters is gratefully acknowledged. Some material has
been taken from two other published papers: “Why We Need Teaching
Machines,” Harvard Educational Review, 1961, Vol. 31, pp. 377–398
and “Reflections on a Decade of Teaching Machines,” in Teaching
Machines and Programmed Learning, II, edited by Robert Glaser,
Department of Audio Visual Instruction for the National Education
Association, 1965, and prepublished in Teacher’s College Record,
1963, Vol. 65, pp. 168–177.
Three chapters, not previously published, were prepared for special
occasions. Chapter 6 was given as a lecture under the auspices of the
Harvard Graduate School of Education on March 17, 1966. Chapter 7
was read at a meeting of the American Psychological Association,
September 4, 1966. Chapter 8 was given as an inaugural address at the
dedication of the Psychology and Education Building at Mount
Holyoke College on October 8, 1966. All chapters appear in the order
in which they were published or presented. Since each was prepared as
a unit, a few points appear more than once. Minor changes have been
made to reduce repetition, to bring references up to date, and to add
material. Four chapters have been written especially for this book.
It is a pleasure to acknowledge the help of many people. Frank
Keppel, former Dean of the Harvard Graduate School of Education,
offered financial and moral support from the beginning, and McGeorge
Bundy, former Dean of the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, was
equally helpful. Together, they were responsible for Harvard’s

Committee on Programmed Instruction, expertly directed by Wade
Robinson and James G. Holland. Dr. Holland’s collaboration,
particularly in the use of teaching machines in my course on human
behavior, was especially valuable. Susan Meyer Markle, Lloyd
Homme, Nathan Azrin, and Matthew Israel helped on early projects.
Douglas G. Porter, now in charge of Harvard’s Office of Programmed
Instruction, has been helpful throughout. My students and my daughter,
Deborah, were cheerful and courageous subjects in exploratory phases
and have my thanks. Mrs. Alexandra Huebner has been an invaluable
help in the preparation of the manuscript.
In addition to the personnel and space supplied by Harvard
University, I am pleased to acknowledge financial support from the
Ford Foundation, the Carnegie Corporation, the United States Office of
Education (Grant 71-31-0370-051.3), and the Human Ecology Fund. A
Career Award from the National Institutes of Mental Health (Grant K6MH-21, 775-01) has supported preparation of about half the book.
B. F. S.

CONTENTS
Acknowledgments
Foreword I
Foreword II
1. The Etymology of Teaching
2. The Science of Learning and the Art of Teaching
3. Teaching Machines
4. The Technology of Teaching
5. Why Teachers Fail
6. Teaching Thinking
7. The Motivation of the Student
8. The Creative Student
9. Discipline, Ethical Behavior, and Self-Control
10. A Review of Teaching
11. The Behavior of the Establishment
References
Index

FOREWORD I
This volume, Skinner’s only book on education, is a collection of
essays, most of which had either been previously published or had
served as texts for lectures over a period of twelve years. Four of the
essays were written for this book. The content is wide-ranging from the
etymology of “teaching” to teaching machines and programmed
instruction, teaching thinking, ethical behavior and self-control, to
classroom behavior management, and changes in the education
establishment consistent with the new approach.
Though not in his original plan, Skinner addressed this book to
readers well experienced in the laboratory experimental analysis of
behavior and its conceptual underpinnings, both explicit and implicit.
His intent was to encourage if not coax sophisticated experimental
behavior analysts into research and development in the instructional
domain. Unabashedly he points out the weaknesses of education’s
approach to, if not disregard of, the effectiveness of teaching practices
—all potentially fixable by those facile with the concepts and methods
of experimental behavior analysis.
The historical importance of this work is undeniable. It represented
the first attempt to apply a scientifically validated conceptual
methodologic system to classroom instruction. The methods of
experimental analysis have been around since Claude Bernard.
Skinner’s conceptual system is both comprehensive and timeless. The
contents of this volume do not present either, yet they are basic to the
usefulness of this book.
The current timeliness of this assemblage of papers must be viewed
against the backdrop of the research and developments in instructional
design that have occurred since Skinner’s seminal contributions. His
methods form a fundamental component in the mosaic of successful
procedures which, when combined by those fluent in experimental and
conceptual behavior analysis, produces more dramatic gains than ever
before documented—at all education levels.
To comprehend how Skinner’s system is woven into the texture of
maximally effective instructional programs and how to use its riches in
selecting and designing curricular procedures requires more than
exposure to its parts and principles. Incorporating Skinner’s offerings

into designs with maximal return to both instructor and student requires
a depth of conceptual grasp and fluency in its application provided by
very few sources.
Beatrice H. Barrett
Chatham, Massachusetts
March, 2003

1

FOREWORD II
For me the beginning of behavior analysis in education began when I
arrived, in the fall of 1957, at a gray clapboard building, Batchelder
House. Batchelder House, then in decay, had been a rambling residence
just across the street from Harvard’s Memorial Hall where the
Psychology Department, including Skinner’s office and laboratory, was
housed. A year earlier Skinner had received a modest grant from the
Ford Foundation, and to accommodate the new staff of two was
assigned one medium size room in this off campus building which had
dust that must have dated back to the days of the McGuffey Reader.
Memories of those days in Batchelder House give me a special
personal verification of humorist Francis Parkinson’s claim that active,
productive and innovative activities are to be found, not in new
buildings which instead house moribund organizations, but in small,
converted, understaffed, and unkempt buildings. In this light it seems
fitting that this room in Batchelder House served as cradle for an
offspring of Skinner’s basic science, the experimental analysis of
behavior. The infant, programmed instruction and teaching machines,
was to take many forms as it grew and exerted an influence on many
educational practices. Moreover, the efforts at instructional design were
to reveal omissions in the basic science and were to prompt new
directions of research which would, in time, enrich the parent theory.
But when I moved into Batchelder House that fall day in 1957, this
scenario was unclear. Lloyd Homme and Sue Markle had been at work
for a year. Homme was about to return to the University of Pittsburgh
as his year’s leave was over. In Batchelder House he had prepared units
teaching the uses of suffixes and prefixes to build vocabulary. These
units were both exercises in programming aimed at discovering more
about the process and examples of the possibilities that this use of the
science of behavior held for instruction. I joined this enterprise by
setting out to prepare a program to teach the content of a course which
Fred Skinner had taught for many years.
Harvard’s course—Natural Sciences 114—taught undergraduates the
nature and findings of the experimental analysis of behavior pioneered
by Fred Skinner. It dealt considerably with Skinner’s extrapolation of
the science to interpreting human behavior in society at large. He had

earlier written his book Science and Human Behavior for this course
and now our task was to prepare a teaching machine program covering
this content. We were particularly pleased that the first actual use of
our new technology in a regular educational setting would be to teach
the science which provided the fundamental principles of the
technology itself.
The teaching machine portion of the course took place in a small
room in the basement of Sever Hall, a venerable old building in
Harvard Yard. Our room had been used for storage but now was
remodeled to accommodate ten cubicles each lined with acoustical tile
and each containing a teaching machine. The machine itself was one of
several designed by Skinner. It was a mechanical marvel and was
reminiscent of the age of brass instrument psychology. It was, in size
and shape, like a small suitcase. The brass coated lid and face was one
of the larger sides of this box. ‘The student opened the lid and placed in
it a paper disc, 12 inches in diameter, which was divided into 30 wedge
shaped areas each containing a single item, or frame, of the teaching
program. The usual form was a completion item, a sentence with one or
more words missing. A small triangular corner of each frame contained
the answer to the item. With the lid closed a single frame was exposed.
Under an additional window the students could write their answers on a
strip of adding machine tape. They would then move a lever which
operated a small shutter that exposed the correct answer,
simultaneously advancing their own constructed answer to a position
under a glass plate where it could be seen and compared with the
correct answer, but not changed. If the student judged the answer to be
correct, an additional movement of the lever punched a small hole
beside the constructed answer and internally set a detent so this item
would not be presented again. On completion of all 30 frames the
student would start through a second time and the disc would rapidly
rotate past all correctly answered items stopping only on the few items
answered incorrectly. The lever used for exposing items and indicating
correctness of answers also wound a spring which powered the disc
mechanism.
It was not long after my arrival that Natural Science 114 was due to
be taught so we rapidly began to program material, but had only a
small portion of the course ready on the first day of class. The lights of
Batchelder House burned late as I worked to stay ahead of the students
in generating material for the machine. During the day, students
appeared at the machine room at times of their own choosing, worked

as long as they wished, and left better prepared to understand and enjoy
the lecture part of the course.
The 30 small wedges were a tight constraint on the writing of
material. Strunk and White in their classic book Elements of Style, gave
the would-be author the strong dictum, “Get rid of unnecessary words.”
Writing small frames to fit the boundaries of the wedge made it
important to get rid of unnecessary words. Unfortunately those very
small frames became identified by many as the defining characteristic
of programmed instruction, a characteristic that took a decade to
outgrow.
As the semester progressed box after box filled with strips of adding
machine paper covered with student answers. There were our data. At
the end of the term we tallied item by item, correct and incorrect, for
each student. Each of the 250 students had generated about 3000
answers. We were interested in precisely what answers they might give
when the item was answered incorrectly. We had attempted to prepare
items that were correctly answerable only through mastery of what the
item was supposed to teach. That is, we designed, in the language of
our science, a contingency of reinforcement. At the same time, it was
important for the student to be able to perform what was expected of
him at each step along the way. Hence, we were striving for error free
performance. In this first year we were very far from error free
performances or even the 5% error rate which, as pragmatists, we
considered the maximum allowed without requiring revisions. After
our tally of the data we carefully rewrote the program. We were excited
by the fact that unlike any other efforts in education we had the means
to gather detailed data on our teaching procedures and were able,
thereby, to make fine adjustments. As behaviorists, after all, we were
not allowed the luxury of accusing the nonlearner of stupidity. The
fault, according to an experimental analysis of behavior, must rest in
environmental contingencies and it was just those contingencies which
formed our program. Three development cycles, classroom use, data
analysis, and revision, were completed with dramatic improvement in
our program after each recycling, and eventually it was published under
the title The Analysis of Behavior.
But back at the time of our first use at Sever Hall, interest and
activity in programming materials began sweeping the country. The
concept had excited many in universities who enthusiastically set out to
program their courses or to prepare materials for the primary grades.
Publishers became interested. Authors of industrial training material

turned in overwhelming numbers to programming. Special new
companies devoted to teaching machines and programming emerged,
and large industrial firms explored the possibilities for teaching
machines. But before considering where this interest led, let us
consider the antecedents, for programmed instruction is an example of
the use of a basic science in generating specific, deliberate applications.
In addition the use of this basic science in programmed instruction
eventually permeated standard practices until the new principles
became intuitive truths.
In the 1930s Skinner had developed the concept of operant behavior
and the means of analyzing the controlling variables for the behavior of
individual organisms. His approach and the shape of his science was
articulated in 1938 in his book The Behavior of Organisms. Most that
has followed in the science has been refinement and expansion of the
discoveries revealed in this seminal work. In the concluding chapter of
the book Skinner says:
The reader will have noticed that no extension to human behavior is made or
suggested. This does not mean that he is expected to be interested in behavior of
the rat for its own sake. The importance of a science of behavior derives largely
from the possibility of an eventual extension to human affairs. But it is a serious,
though common, mistake to allow questions of ultimate application to influence
development of a systematic science at an early stage. I think it is true that the
direction of the present inquiry has been determined solely by the exigencies of
the system. It would, of course, still have been possible to suggest applications to
human behavior in a limited way at each step. This would probably have made for
easier reading, but it would have unreasonably lengthened the book. Besides, the
careful reader should be as able to make applications as the writer. The book
represents nothing more than an experimental analysis of a representative sample
of behavior. Let him extrapolate who will.

It was not long after this that Skinner did extrapolate. He did so first
in his teaching. Natural Science 114 was just such an extrapolation to
day-to-day life. But it was only when he began using these principles to
design teaching machines that an explicit effort was made to apply his
science and create a technology for the solution of behavioral
problems.
Our early programming activities functioned in the development of
the technology. These served as models for the use of fundamental
behavior principles and the basis for describing this new technology.

The lab had taught us the power of establishing contingent
relationships between behavior and reinforcement, and we defined
programmed instruction as the arrangement of careful sequences of
contingencies of reinforcement leading to the objectives of education.
From the laboratory we knew that through shaping, difficult forms of
behavior could be established which would never appear naturally
without the arrangement of a progressive series of contingencies, and
here was the basis for designing programs. The science had abandoned
mythical inner causes of behavior and had demonstrated the power of
analyzing behavior and its controlling events. In this the science has
provided the basis for behavioral objectives in education and holds the
possibility, as yet unfulfilled, of an experimental analysis of knowledge
itself.
In the flurry of activity which followed these first examples of
applied behavior analysis in instructional design, many impressive
results were obtained for a wide variety of skills and subject matter
areas. At the same time, a number of programs followed the superficial
characteristics of the techniques without reflecting the laboratory based
principles. One common failure of teaching materials is to aim at
certain behavioral objectives while allowing the student to perform
tasks that only superficially resemble the desired behavior. For
example, science education materials may have a goal of teaching
scientific inquiry, while the instructional techniques only guide the
student through certain problem-solving methods without ever teaching
the student to generate the steps.
But perhaps the most frequent and damaging problem in poorly
designed educational materials is the failure to ensure a contingent
relationship between the student’s correct answer and what is to be
learned through that answer. A student learns what he or she performs.
Usually in an instructional situation only a small part of the student’s
activity is public and available to the instructor; i.e., a question is
answered about material the student has read, or an answer is written to
a problem in the lesson material. The task of the developer of
educational materials is to ensure that the final public performance
depends upon the correct execution of the private act—a correct answer
indicates that the material has been read and the problem has been
worked out. This is the problem of response contingency. This
common failing in poorly prepared materials involves over-cueing or
inappropriate cueing which enables the student to answer correctly
without having actually performed the task that the lesson was intended

to evoke.
We had failed, apparently, to make this principle clear. Subsequently
we developed a technique that would make response contingencies
very clear. This technique involved deleting, by covering with black
crayon, all material which did not contribute to reaching a correct
answer. For example, a lengthy exercise in a statistics program for
engineering students described the determination of arithmetic
combinations and permutations, but when the student was finally asked
to do something with this information the question was simply “3 x 2 x
1= _.” None of the information on combinations or permutations was
necessary for the answer. A contingent relationship was lacking since
all of the preceding material could be covered with black crayon
without affecting the student’s answer. This total blacking-out of the
material demonstrates the need to rewrite the material so that the
student must make use of the information to obtain a correct answer.
This technique permitted a quantitative measure of the degree to which
the contingency principle was met. We called it the black-out
technique.
On the heels of this first effort to program, our lab as well as others
began turning away from programming verbal knowledge. We moved
to areas and skills that traditionally have been taught poorly.
Demonstrations were prepared for teaching difficult musical
discriminations, and a gadget was designed to reinforce matching an
auditory rhythm. Visual discrimination programs were developed to
teach spatial thinking and inductive reasoning skills. Under a grant
from Carnegie Corporation, the Committee on Programmed Instruction
was formed to facilitate Harvard and MIT faculty efforts in
programming skills in their own areas. Languages and sciences were
particularly emphasized, and I enjoyed the paradox of two Chomsky
students programming language teaching objectives derived from
Chomsky’s structural linguistics which he felt to be a refutation of
Skinner’s analysis of verbal behavior. Across the country programming
efforts had become so widespread that Carl Hendershot provided a
major contribution by keeping an updated compilation of programs.
But gradually the term “programmed instruction” became less
fashionable even as the influence spread more widely. Objectives in
education became behavioral objectives. Books and lesson plans,
whether they were touched by programmed instruction or not, at least
benefited by borrowing the method of defining their teaching
objectives.

Doug Porter, from the beginning a resident of Batchelder House
although not administratively on the project, branched out from his
early involvement to work for the Office of Education in developing a
training package for The Job Corps. Faced with the immediate problem
of creating a reading curriculum for Job Corps trainees, he gathered
together a variety of curriculum materials from pre-reading to high
school level, including a programmed package for beginning reading.
Porter then designed a graded examination for diagnosing the particular
needs of the corpsmen for placement in these materials. Shortly after
this, one of the leading centers in programmed instruction at the
University of Pittsburgh, spearheaded by Robert Glaser who had
carried out research in programmed instruction, turned to the idea of
diagnosing individual needs through prescriptive testing and placement
under the coined name “individually prescribed instruction.” While this
new emphasis focused on diagnostic procedures, the teaching material
generally followed the experimental analysis of instruction.
To implement developments in individualized instruction, in 1964,
Glaser and Gow formed a new organization, the Learning Research and
Development Center, devoted to facilitating education through
fostering an interplay between science and practice in education. The
creation of the Center embodied the metaphor of a long hallway with a
lab at one end, a classroom at the other end, and between the two all the
sequential stages of technological development with busy scientistdevelopers running back and forth through the hall. A few years later,
Fred Keller extended the concepts into the Personalized System of
Instruction. In his system the wedge-shaped frame is gone, the teaching
material comes in larger hunks and students answer questions of larger
scope, but still the questions are prepared so that an answer is
contingent on mastery of preceding material.
The influence of the beginning of these applications of our science
was not limited to the world of education. More than an opportunity to
improve education through behavior science had begun. The teaching
machine was the first step in what we now call applied behavior
analysis. The science was there waiting to be used to improve
conditions for people. No doubt various areas of application could have
emerged but one opening was made through programmed instruction.
Many of the simple applications involve only reinforcing a single
response already in the person’s repertoire. For example, orienting
toward the teacher might be reinforced. When more difficult
performances are involved, however, the similarities to the techniques

developed in programmed instruction are apparent. Establishing speech
in an autistic child requires a slow, gradual shaping process that
carefully constructs utterances of sounds, then simple single words and
later sentences.
By the end of the 20th century, even clinicians explicitly drew upon
principles of programmed instruction. For example, Israel Goldiamond
suggested that the therapist in producing a clinical program specify
target or outcome, specify entry behaviors and beginning repertoire of
the person, sequence behavior-change steps, and finally provide
maintenance consequences for each step in the sequence. This clinical
approach emphasizes constructing new operants by building on the
current repertoire of the individual as in programmed instruction.
Programmed instruction illustrates the usefulness of basic research in
leading to important applications, but the flow of influence goes the
other way as well. Attempts at using basic science in dealing with realworld problems removes the tunnel vision of the basic scientist. The
complexities of the applied settings may reveal oversights and gaps that
exist in the theory. The practitioner, to solve his immediate problems,
does the best he can by improvising to cover the deficiencies, but when
basic and applied scientists are closely related, or even perhaps the
same person, experience in application can open new research areas
and enrich the parent theory.
One of the several serious gaps was revealed as we set out to teach
discriminations errorlessly. Until this time laboratory research in
stimulus discrimination had always proceeded by reinforcing a
response to one stimulus while extinguishing it in the presence of
another stimulus. Animal discrimination typically progressed slowly.
They responded in the presence of what was to be the negative stimulus
as well as the positive stimulus until gradually, after hundreds or even
thousands of responses to the negative stimulus, extinction was
complete with the animal responding only to the positive stimulus. This
was the only way discriminations were formed in the laboratory, and it
was assumed that it was the only way to do it. As Keller and
Schoenfeld put it in their textbook Principles of Psychology,
“Extinction is the hall-mark of discrimination.”
Nevertheless, when we attempted to program discrimination
learning, we worked out gradual progressions of stimuli to obtain as
close to errorless performance as we could. Even relatively simple
discriminations were unmanageably difficult otherwise. Children could
not be kept at the task long enough to run off the necessary extinction

curve. But here was a paradox. The way we were teaching
discriminations in an applied context was not in agreement with the
basic research. A graduate student, Herb Terrace, looking for a
dissertation topic, saw this paradox and he carried the problem into the
laboratory. He established errorless discriminations in pigeons and
began investigating the properties of discriminations established this
way as contrasted with the classical procedure. It turned out that the
two types of discrimination learning were quite different. Not only was
the errorless procedure faster, but the resulting discrimination differed
in ways that are important to a systematic understanding of behavior.
Terrace, and the work he stimulated, focused on the properties of
discriminations after they were formed. Forming errorless
discriminations in the laboratory or in practice was still an art. Not
every progression worked. Here another gap in our knowledge was
revealed and the interplay between laboratory and practice continued.
Subsequently an active area of laboratory research was the
determination of the conditions for establishing control by a new
stimulus dimension. This work involved a number of people, such as
Paul Touchette and Judith Doran, and moved back and forth between
laboratory and practice. Studies seemed to indicate that successful
fading is not due to an associative transfer of control by pairing a
controlling stimulus with the new stimulus. Instead, successful fading
seems dependent upon the arrangement of conditions that ensure a
response contingent relationship with the new stimulus similar to that
found in response shaping. Again we saw that a steady interplay
between research and application improved both.
In sum, the analysis of behavior in instruction, from the early
teaching machines to today, is an interesting case study of the interplay
between basic science and a technology based on science. The effects
of contingencies of reinforcement, the nature of shaping, and the
analysis of psychological phenomena in behavioral terms were learned
from our basic science which now serve us as we attempt to arrange
sequences of contingencies to meet behaviorally defined educational
objectives. Applications spread to the modification of behavior outside
educational settings into therapy and social management situations.
When practice remains true to the proven principles of the laboratory
impressive gains are made; when basic principles are neglected the
results are less impressive or even embarrassing. At the same time
practice is the ultimate test of theory, and applied behavior analysis in
instruction opened new directions that continue to provide a more

complete understanding of behavior.
James G. Holland
Pittsburgh, PA
March, 2003
1

This foreword is a version of a talk given in November 1975 at the Third National Conference

on Behavior Research and Technology in Higher Education, and published in the conference
proceedings.

1

THE ETYMOLOGY OF TEACHING
The educated person differs from the uneducated in almost everything
he does. Three great metaphors have been devised to account for the
behavior which distinguishes him.
Growth or development. The behavior is sometimes attributed to
maturation, the embryo with its minimal contact with the environment
providing a good analogy. The metaphor is most convincing in the
early years. The behavior of a child is studied as a function of time;
charts and graphs record the appearance of responses at various ages;
and typical performances are established as norms. The results can be
used to predict behavior but, since time cannot be controlled, not to
change it. The emphasis is on the topography of behavior—its form or
structure. The metaphor assigns only a modest role to the teacher, who
“cannot really teach but only help the student learn.” To teach is to
nourish or cultivate the growing child (as in a Kindergarten), or to give
him intellectual exercise, or to train him in the horticultural sense of
directing or guiding his growth.
Development does not easily account for many features of behavior
which are obviously derived from the environment. A child may be
born capable of learning to speak English, but he is certainly not born
English-speaking. What grows or develops cannot be behavior as such.
It is often said instead to be certain inner requirements or determinants
of behavior, such as cognitive powers, faculties, or traits of character.
Education is said to be the culture of the intellect or mind. A student
grows in wisdom. He behaves more successfully when concepts emerge
in his thinking.
Acquisition. The environmental variables neglected by growth or
development find their place in a second metaphor in which the student
gets his knowledge and skills from the world around him. He receives
an education. The learning process is followed in curves of acquisition.
The teacher plays the active role of transmitter. He shares his
experiences. He gives and the student takes. The energetic student
grasps the structure of facts or ideas. If he is less active, the teacher
impresses facts upon him, or drills ideas into him, or inculcates good
taste or a love of learning (“inculcate” originally meant to grind under
the heel).

In an osmotic version of the metaphor of acquisition, the student
absorbs knowledge from the world about him. He soaks up
information. What the teacher says sinks in. Teaching is a form of
alchemical wetting: the student is imbued with a love of learning, ideas
are infused, wisdom is instilled. In a gastronomic version the student
has an appetite or thirst for knowledge. He digests facts and principles
(provided he is not given more than he can chew). In another version,
teaching is impregnation. The teacher is seminal (á tout vent). He
propagates knowledge. He engenders thoughts. He implants the germs
of ideas, and the student conceives (provided he has a fertile mind). A
medical version is based on infection or contagion.
As these expressions show, transmission is also a plausible metaphor
only if we are speaking of inner states or entities. The teacher does not
actually pass along some of his own behavior. He is said to impart
knowledge, possibly only after subdividing it into meanings, concepts,
facts, and propositions. (Theories of learning which emphasize
acquisition make the same concession: behavior is only “performance”;
what are acquired are associations, concepts, hypotheses, and so on—
depending on the theory.) What is transmitted must also be stored (the
teacher stocks the student’s mind, and the student retains what he has
acquired), but it is not behavior but only certain precursors or
determiners which can be stored in memory.
These conceptual maneuvers are necessary because neither growth
nor acquisition correctly represents the interchange between organism
and environment. Growth is confined to one variable—the form or
structure of behavior—and acquisition adds a second—the stimulating
environment; but two variables are still not enough, as the inadequacies
of both stimulus-response and information theories show. Superficially,
the exchange between organism and environment may be viewed as a
matter of input and output, but difficulties arise. Some discrepancies
may be attributed to overloading, blocking, and so on, but output still
cannot be accounted for solely in terms of input. Certain inner activities
—physiological in stimulus-response theories, cognitive in information
theory—are therefore invented and given just those properties needed
to complete the account.
Apart from theoretical difficulties, neither metaphor tells the teacher
what to do or lets him see what he has done. No one literally cultivates
the behavior of a child as one cultivates a garden or transmits
information as one carries a letter from one place to another.

Construction. A student possesses a genetic endowment which
develops or matures, and his behavior becomes more and more
complex as he makes contact with the world around him, but
something else happens as he learns. If we must have a metaphor to
represent teaching, instruction (or, better, the cognate construction)
will serve. In this sense we say that the teacher informs the student, in
the sense that his behavior is given form or shape. To teach is to edify
in the sense of build. It is possible, of course, to say that the teacher
builds precursors such as knowledge, habits, or interests, but the
metaphor of construction does not demand this because the behavior of
the student can in a very real sense be constructed.
All three metaphors are embedded in our language and it is perhaps
impossible to avoid them in informal discussion. Many examples will
be found in the present text. Any serious analysis of the interchange
between organism and environment must, however, avoid metaphor.
Three variables compose the so-called contingencies of reinforcement
under which learning takes place: (1) an occasion upon which behavior
occurs, (2) the behavior itself, and (3) the consequences of the
behavior. Contingencies so composed, together with their effects, have
been thoroughly investigated in the experimental analysis of behavior
upon which this book is based. Some familiarity with any science is, of
course, helpful in considering its technological applications, and
probably no part of a scientific analysis of human behavior is irrelevant
to education, but a detailed familiarity is not assumed in what follows.
1
Facts and principles will be presented as needed.
So far as we are concerned here, teaching is simply the arrangement
of contingencies of reinforcement. Left to himself in a given
environment a student will learn, but he will not necessarily have been
taught. The school of experience is no school at all, not because no one
learns in it, but because no one teaches. Teaching is the expediting of
learning; a person who is taught learns more quickly than one who is
not. Teaching is most important, of course, when the behavior would
not otherwise arise. (Everything which is now taught must have been
learned at least once by someone who was not being taught, but thanks
to education we no longer need to wait for these rare events.)

THREE THEORIES
Certain traditional ways of characterizing learning and teaching

appear to be not so much wrong as incomplete in the sense that they do
not fully describe the contingencies of reinforcement under which
behavior changes.
“We learn by doing.” It is important to emphasize that a student
does not passively absorb knowledge from the world around him but
must play an active role, and also that action is not simply talking. To
know is to act effectively, both verbally and nonverbally. But a student
does not learn simply by doing. Although he is likely to do things he
has already done, we do not make it more likely that he will do
something a second time by getting him to do it once. We do not teach
a child to throw a ball simply by inducing him to throw it. It is not true,
as Aristotle asserted, that we learn harp-playing by playing the harp
and ethical behavior by behaving ethically. If learning occurs under
such circumstances, it is because other conditions have been
inadvertently arranged. Much more than going through the motions is
involved when a child throws a ball or a student plays a harp or
behaves ethically. Execution of the behavior may be essential, but it
does not guarantee that learning will take place.
“Frequency theories” extend the notion of learning by doing. When
one instance of a response makes no obvious difference, the teacher
adds other instances. There are plausible analogies. If we spin the end
of a stick against a stone, we may leave no mark, but if we spin it
repeatedly, we drill a hole, and we drill our students in the same sense.
A wheel passing over hard ground may leave no trace, but if it passes
often enough, it leaves a rut or route, and this is the sense in which our
students learn by rote. The teacher induces his student to exercise or
practice so that his habits, like his muscles, will grow stronger with
use. But it is what is happening frequently, not mere “frequency,”
which is the important thing.
“Recency theories” also emphasize learning by doing. An organism
is likely to do again what it has done because conditions responsible for
the first response probably still prevail and may even have been
improved. Having observed one occurrence, therefore, we often
successfully predict a second, but only because we then have evidence
that conditions are favorable.
“We learn from experience.” The student is to learn about the world
in which he lives and must be brought into contact with it. The teacher
therefore provides the student with experiences, singling out features to

be noted or sets of features to be associated, often by pairing a verbal
response with the thing or event it describes: “This is a gazebo,” or
“Note that the fluid rises in the tube.” From experience alone a student
probably learns nothing. He will not even perceive the environment
simply because he is in contact with it.
Combining experience with doing, we arrive at a two-variable
formulation in which “experience” represents stimulus or input and
“doing” represents response or output. Possibly what is learned is a
connection between the two. But why is a connection made? The usual
answer (appropriate to a two-variable formulation) invokes
hypothetical inner activities. The student does something. He “learns,”
for example, as a kind of mental action; he processes the information
he receives from the environment; he organizes his experiences; he
forms connections in his mind. We are forced to assume that he does
all this because we have neglected important variables in the
environment to which the result could otherwise be traced.
“We learn by trial and error.” Certain stimuli standing in a different
temporal relation to behavior remain to be taken into account. They
compose another kind of experience, the significance of which is often
expressed by saying that we learn by trial and error. The reference is to
the consequences of behavior, which are often called, with some
suggestion as to their effects, reward and punishment.
The concept of trial and error has a long history in the study of
problem solving and other forms of learning in both animals and men.
Learning curves are commonly plotted to show changes in the number
of errors made in performing a task. A sampling of behavior is
generally called a trial. The formula is easily applied to daily affairs,
but it is quite inadequate in describing the role played by the
consequences of behavior in contingencies of reinforcement. No doubt
we often learn from our errors (at least we may learn not to make them
again), but correct behavior is not simply what remains when erroneous
behavior has been chipped away. When we characterize behavior as
“trying,” we inject a reference to consequences into what should be a
description of the topography of response. The term “error” does not
refer to the physical dimensions of the consequences, even those called
punishment. The implication that learning occurs only when errors are
made is false.
These classical theories represent the three essential parts of any set
of contingencies of reinforcement: learning by doing emphasizes the

response; learning from experience, the occasion upon which the
response occurs; and learning by trial-and-error, the consequences. But
no one part can be studied entirely by itself, and all three parts must be
recognized in formulating any given instance of learning. It would be
difficult to bring the three theories together to compose a useful
formulation. Fortunately we do not need to do so. Such theories are
now of historical interest only, and unfortunately much of the work
which was done to support them is also of little current value. We may
turn instead to a more adequate analysis of the changes which take
place as a student learns.
1

The reader who would like to know more about a scientific analysis will find current work

well represented in Operant Behavior: Areas of Research and Application, edited by Werner
Honig (21). Applications to human behavior, most of them outside the field of education, are
reported in The Control of Human Behavior, edited by Ulrich, Stachnik, and Mabry (60).
Implications for human affairs are discussed in the author’s Science and Human Behavior (46).

2

THE SCIENCE OF LEARNING AND THE ART
OF TEACHING
Some promising advances have recently been made in the field of
learning. Special techniques have been designed to arrange what are
called contingencies of reinforcement—the relations which prevail
between behavior on the one hand and the consequences of that
behavior on the other—with the result that a much more effective
control of behavior has been achieved. It has long been argued that an
organism learns mainly by producing changes in its environment, but it
is only recently that these changes have been carefully manipulated. In
traditional devices for the study of learning—in the serial maze, for
example, or in the T-maze, the problem box, or the familiar
discrimination apparatus—the effects produced by the organism’s
behavior are left to many fluctuating circumstances. There is many a
slip between the turn-to-the-right and the food-cup at the end of the
alley. It is not surprising that techniques of this sort have yielded only
very rough data from which the uniformities demanded by an
experimental science can be extracted only by averaging many cases.
In none of this work has the behavior of the individual organism been
predicted in more than a statistical sense. The learning processes which
are the presumed object of such research are reached only through a
series of inferences.
Recent improvements in the conditions which control behavior in the
field of learning are of two principal sorts. The Law of Effect has been
taken seriously; we have made sure that effects do occur and that they
occur under conditions which are optimal for producing the changes
called learning. Once we have arranged the particular type of
consequence called a reinforcement, our techniques permit us to shape
the behavior of an organism almost at will. It has become a routine
exercise to demonstrate this in classes in elementary psychology by
conditioning such an organism as a pigeon. Simply by presenting food
to a hungry pigeon at the right time, it is possible to shape three or four
well-defined responses in a single demonstration period—such
responses as turning around, pacing the floor in the pattern of a figure
eight, standing still in a corner of the demonstration apparatus,
stretching the neck, or stamping the foot. Extremely complex
performances may be reached through successive stages in the shaping

process, the contingencies of reinforcement being changed
progressively in the direction of the required behavior. The results are
often quite dramatic. In such a demonstration one can see learning take
place. A significant change in behavior is often obvious as the result of
a single reinforcement.
A second important advance in technique permits us to maintain
behavior in given states of strength for long periods of time.
Reinforcements continue to be important, of course, long after an
organism has learned how to do something, long after it has acquired
behavior. They are necessary to maintain the behavior in strength. Of
special interest is the effect of various schedules of intermittent
reinforcement. Most of the basic schedules have been investigated and
in general have been reduced to a few principles. On the theoretical
side we now have a fairly good idea of why a given schedule produces
its appropriate performance. On the practical side we have learned how
to maintain any given level of activity for daily periods limited only by
the physical endurance of the organism and from day to day without
substantial change throughout its life. Many of these effects would be
traditionally assigned to the field of motivation, although the principal
operation is simply the arrangement of contingencies of reinforcement.
These new methods of shaping behavior and of maintaining it in
strength are a great improvement over the traditional practices of
professional animal trainers, and it is not surprising that our laboratory
results are already being applied to the production of performing
animals for commercial purposes. In a more academic environment
they have been used for demonstration purposes which extend far
beyond an interest in learning as such. For example, it is not too
difficult to arrange the complex contingencies which produce many
types of social behavior. Competition is exemplified by two pigeons
playing a modified game of ping-pong (52). The pigeons drive the ball
back and forth across a small table by pecking at it. When the ball gets
by one pigeon, the other is reinforced. The task of constructing such a
“social relation” is probably completely out of reach of the traditional
animal trainer. It requires a carefully designed program of gradually
changing contingencies and the skillful use of schedules to maintain the
behavior in strength. Each pigeon is separately prepared for its part in
the total performance, and the social relation is then arbitrarily
constructed. The events leading up to this stable state are excellent
material for the study of the factors important in nonsynthetic social
behavior. It is instructive to consider how a similar series of

contingencies could arise in the case of the human organism through
the evolution of cultural patterns. Cooperation can also be set up,
perhaps more easily than competition. Two pigeons have been trained
to coordinate their behavior in a cooperative endeavor with a precision
which equals that of the most skillful human dancers (52).
In a more serious vein these techniques have made it possible to
explore the complexities of the individual organism and to analyze
some of the serial or coordinate behaviors involved in attention,
problem solving, various types of self-control, and the subsidiary
systems of responses within a single organism called personalities.
Some of these are exemplified in what are called multiple schedules of
reinforcement (16). In general a given schedule has an effect upon the
rate at which a response is emitted. Changes in the rate from moment to
moment show a pattern typical of the schedule. The pattern may be as
simple as a constant rate of responding at a given value; it may be a
gradually accelerating rate between certain extremes; it may be an
abrupt change from not responding at all to a given stable high rate. It
has been shown that the performance characteristic of a given schedule
can be brought under the control of a particular stimulus and that
different performances can be brought under the control of different
stimuli in the same organism. In one experiment performances
appropriate to nine different schedules were brought under the control
of appropriate stimuli presented at random. When Stimulus 1 was
present, the pigeon executed the performance appropriate to Schedule
1. When Stimulus 2 was present, the pigeon executed the performance
appropriate to Schedule 2. And so on. This result is important because
it makes the extrapolation of our laboratory results to daily life much
more plausible. We are all constantly shifting from schedule to
schedule as our immediate environment changes.
It is also possible to construct very complex sequences of schedules,
It is not easy to describe these in a few words, but two or three
examples may be mentioned, in one experiment the pigeon generates a
performance appropriate to Schedule A where the reinforcement is
simply the production of the stimulus characteristic of Schedule B, to
which the pigeon then responds appropriately. Under a third stimulus,
the bird yields a performance appropriate to Schedule C where the
reinforcement in this case is simply the production of the stimulus
characteristic of Schedule D, to which the bird then responds
appropriately. In a special case, first investigated by L. B. Wyckoff, Jr.,
the organism responds to one stimulus where the reinforcement

consists of the clarification of the stimulus controlling another
response. The first response becomes, so to speak, an objective form of
“paying attention” to the second stimulus. In an important version of
this experiment, we could say that the pigeon is telling us whether it is
paying attention to the shape of a spot of light or to its color.
One of the most dramatic applications of these techniques has been
made by Floyd Ratliff and Donald S. Blough, who have skillfully used
multiple and serial schedules of reinforcement to study complex
perceptual processes in the infrahuman organism. They have achieved
a sort of psychophysics without verbal instruction. In an experiment by
Blough, for example, a pigeon draws a detailed dark-adaptation curve
showing the characteristic breaks of rod and cone vision. The curve is
recorded continuously in a single experimental period and is quite
comparable with the curves of human subjects. The pigeon behaves in
a way which, in the human case, we should not hesitate to describe by
saying that it adjusts a very faint patch of light until it can just be seen
(5).
In all this work, the species of the organism has made surprisingly
little difference. It is true that the organisms studied have all been
vertebrates, but they still cover a wide range. Comparable results have
been obtained with pigeons, rats, dogs, monkeys, human children, and
psychotic subjects. In spite of great phylogenic differences, all these
organisms show amazingly similar properties of the learning process. It
should be emphasized that this has been achieved by analyzing the
effects of reinforcement and by designing techniques which manipulate
reinforcement with considerable precision. Only in this way can the
behavior of the individual organism be brought under such precise
control. It is also important to note that through a gradual advance to
complex interrelations among responses, the same degree of rigor is
being extended to behavior which would usually be assigned to such
fields as perception, thinking, and personality dynamics.

SCHOOLROOM TEACHING
From this exciting prospect of an advancing science of learning, it is
a great shock to turn to that branch of technology which is most
directly concerned with the learning process—education. Let us
1
consider, for example, the teaching of arithmetic in the lower grades.
The school is concerned with imparting to the child a large number of

responses of a special sort. The responses are all verbal. They consist
of speaking and writing certain words, figures, and signs which, to put
it roughly, refer to numbers and to arithmetic operations. The first task
is to shape these responses—to get the child to pronounce and to write
responses correctly, but the principal task is to bring this behavior
under many sorts of stimulus control. This is what happens when the
child learns to count, to recite tables, to count while ticking off the
items in an assemblage of objects, to respond to spoken or written
numbers by saying “odd,” “even,” or “prime.” Over and above this
elaborate repertoire of numerical behavior, most of which is often
dismissed as the product of rote learning, the teaching of arithmetic
looks forward to those complex serial arrangements of responses
involved in original mathematical thinking. The child must acquire
responses of transposing, clearing fractions, and so on, which modify
the order or pattern of the original material so that the response called a
solution is eventually made possible.
Now, how is this extremely complicated verbal repertoire set up? In
the first place, what reinforcements are used? Fifty years ago the
answer would have been clear. At that time educational control was
still frankly aversive. The child read numbers, copied numbers,
memorized tables, and performed operations upon numbers to escape
the threat of the birch rod or cane. Some positive reinforcements were
perhaps eventually derived from the increased efficiency of the child in
the field of arithmetic and in rare cases some automatic reinforcement
may have resulted from the sheer manipulation of the medium—from
the solution of problems or the discovery of the intricacies of the
number system. But for the immediate purposes of education the child
acted to avoid or escape punishment. It was part of the reform
movement known as progressive education to make the positive
consequences more immediately effective, but any one who visits the
lower grades of the average school today will observe that a change has
been made, not from aversive to positive control, but from one form of
aversive stimulation to another. The child at his desk, filling in his
workbook, is behaving primarily to escape from the threat of a series of
minor aversive events—the teacher’s displeasure, the criticism or
ridicule of his classmates, an ignominious showing in a competition,
low marks, a trip to the office “to be talked to” by the principal, or a
word to the parent who may still resort to the birch rod. In this welter
of aversive consequences, getting the right answer is in itself an
insignificant event, any effect of which is lost amid the anxieties, the

boredom, and the aggressions which are the inevitable by-products of
aversive control.
Secondly, we have to ask how the contingencies of reinforcement are
arranged. When is a numerical operation reinforced as “right”?
Eventually, of course, the pupil may be able to check his own answers
and achieve some sort of automatic reinforcement, but in the early
stages the reinforcement of being right is usually accorded by the
teacher. The contingencies she provides are far from optimal. It can
easily be demonstrated that, unless explicit mediating behavior has
been set up, the lapse of only a few seconds between response and
reinforcement destroys most of the effect. In a typical classroom,
nevertheless, long periods of time customarily elapse. The teacher may
walk up and down the aisle, for example, while the class is working on
a sheet of problems, pausing here and there to call an answer right or
wrong. Many minutes intervene between the child’s response and the
teacher’s reinforcement. In many cases—for example, when papers are
taken home to be corrected—as much as 24 hours may intervene. It is
surprising that this system has any effect whatsoever.
A third notable shortcoming is the lack of a skillful program which
moves forward through a series of progressive approximations to the
final complex behavior desired. A long series of contingencies is
necessary to bring the pupil into the possession of mathematical
behavior most efficiently. But the teacher is seldom able to reinforce at
each step in such a series because she cannot deal with the pupil’s
responses one at a time. It is usually necessary to reinforce the behavior
in blocks of responses—as in correcting a worksheet or page from a
workbook. The responses within such a block must not be interrelated.
The answer to one problem must not depend upon the answer to
another. The number of stages through which one may progressively
approach a complex pattern of behavior is therefore small, and the task
so much the more difficult. Even the most modern workbook in
beginning arithmetic is far from exemplifying an efficient program for
shaping mathematical behavior.
Perhaps the most serious criticism of the current classroom is the
relative infrequency of reinforcement. Since the pupil is usually
dependent upon the teacher for being told that he is right, and since
many pupils are usually dependent upon the same teacher, the total
number of contingencies which may be arranged during, say, the first
four years, is of the order of only a few thousand. But a very rough
estimate suggests that efficient mathematical behavior at this level

requires something of the order of 25,000 contingencies. We may
suppose that even in the brighter student a given contingency must be
arranged several times to place the behavior well in hand. The
responses to be set up are not simply the various items in tables of
addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division; we have also to
consider the alternative forms in which each item may be stated. To the
learning of such material we should add hundreds of responses such as
those concerned with factoring, identifying primes, memorizing series,
using short-cut techniques of calculation, and constructing and using
geometric representations or number forms. Over and above all this,
the whole mathematical repertoire must be brought under the control of
concrete problems of considerable variety. Perhaps 50,000
contingencies is a more conservative estimate. In this frame of
reference the daily assignment in arithmetic seems pitifully meagre.
The result of all this is, of course, well known. Even our best schools
are under criticism for their inefficiency in the teaching of drill subjects
such as arithmetic. The condition in the average school is a matter of
widespread national concern. Modern children simply do not learn
arithmetic quickly or well. Nor is the result simply incompetence. The
very subjects in which modern techniques are weakest are those in
which failure is most conspicuous, and in the wake of an ever-growing
incompetence come the anxieties, uncertainties, and aggressions which
in their turn present other problems to the school. Most pupils soon
claim the asylum of not being “ready” for arithmetic at a given level or,
eventually, of not having a mathematical mind. Such explanations are
readily seized upon by defensive teachers and parents. Few pupils ever
reach the stage at which automatic reinforcements follow as the natural
consequences of mathematical behavior. On the contrary, the figures
and symbols of mathematics have become standard emotional stimuli.
The glimpse of a column of figures, not to say an algebraic symbol or
an integral sign, is likely to set off, not mathematical behavior, but a
reaction of anxiety, guilt, or fear.
The teacher is usually no happier about this than the pupil. Denied
the opportunity to control via the birch rod, quite at sea as to the mode
of operation of the few techniques at her disposal, she spends as little
time as possible on drill subjects and eagerly subscribes to philosophies
of education which emphasize material of greater inherent interest. A
confession of weakness is her extraordinary concern lest the child be
taught something unnecessary. The repertoire to be imparted is
carefully reduced to an essential minimum. In the field of spelling, for

example, a great deal of time and energy has gone into discovering just
those words which the young child is going to use, as if it were a crime
to waste one’s educational power in teaching an unnecessary word.
Eventually, weakness of technique emerges in the disguise of a
reformulation of the aims of education. Skills are minimized in favor of
vague achievements—educating for democracy, educating the whole
child, educating for life, and so on. And there the matter ends; for,
unfortunately, these philosophies do not in turn suggest improvements
in techniques. They offer little or no help in the design of better
classroom practices.

THE IMPROVEMENT OF TEACHING
There would be no point in urging these objections if improvement
were impossible. But the advances which have recently been made in
our control of the learning process suggest a thorough revision of
classroom practices and, fortunately, they tell us how the revision can
be brought about. This is not, of course, the first time that the results of
an experimental science have been brought to bear upon the practical
problems of education. The modern classroom does not, however, offer
much evidence that research in the field of learning has been respected
or used. This condition is no doubt partly due to the limitations of
earlier research. But it has been encouraged by a too hasty conclusion
that the laboratory study of learning is inherently limited because it
cannot take into account the realities of the classroom. In the light of
our increasing knowledge of the learning process we should, instead,
insist upon dealing with those realities and forcing a substantial change
in them. Education is perhaps the most important branch of scientific
technology. It deeply affects the lives of all of us. We can no longer
allow the exigencies of a practical situation to suppress the tremendous
improvements which are within reach. The practical situation must be
changed.
There are certain questions which have to be answered in turning to
the study of any new organism. What behavior is to be set up? What
reinforcers are at hand? What responses are available in embarking
upon a program of progressive approximation which will lead to the
final form of the behavior? How can reinforcements be most efficiently
scheduled to maintain the behavior in strength? These questions are all
relevant in considering the problem of the child in the lower grades.

In the first place, what reinforcements are available? What does the
school have in its possession which will reinforce a child? We may
look first to the material to be learned, for it is possible that this will
provide considerable automatic reinforcement. Children play for hours
with mechanical toys, paints, scissors and paper, noise-makers, puzzles
—in short, with almost anything which feeds back significant changes
in the environment and is reasonably free of aversive properties. The
sheer control of nature is itself reinforcing. This effect is not evident in
the modern school because it is masked by the emotional responses
generated by aversive control. It is true that automatic reinforcement
from the manipulation of the environment is probably only a mild
reinforcer and may need to be carefully husbanded, but one of the most
striking principles to emerge from recent research is that the net
amount of reinforcement is of little significance. A very slight
reinforcement may be tremendously effective in controlling behavior if
it is wisely used.
If the natural reinforcement inherent in the subject matter is not
enough, other reinforcers must be employed. Even in school the child is
occasionally permitted to do “what he wants to do,” and access to
reinforcements of many sorts may be made contingent upon the more
immediate consequences of the behavior to be established. Those who
advocate competition as a useful social motive may wish to use the
reinforcements which follow from excelling others, although there is
the difficulty that in this case the reinforcement of one child is
necessarily aversive to another. Next in order we might place the good
will and affection of the teacher, and only when that has failed need we
turn to the use of aversive stimulation.
In the second place, how are these reinforcements to be made
contingent upon the desired behavior? There are two considerations
here—the gradual elaboration of extremely complex patterns of
behavior and the maintenance of the behavior in strength at each stage.
The whole process of becoming competent in any field must be divided
into a very large number of very small steps, and reinforcement must
be contingent upon the accomplishment of each step. This solution to
the problem of creating a complex repertoire of behavior also solves
the problem of maintaining the behavior in strength. We could, of
course, resort to the techniques of scheduling already developed in the
study of other organisms, but in the present state of our knowledge of
educational practices scheduling appears to be most effectively
arranged through the design of the material to be learned. By making

each successive step as small as possible, the frequency of
reinforcement can be raised to a maximum, while the possibly aversive
consequences of being wrong are reduced to a minimum. Other ways
of designing material would yield other programs of reinforcement.
Any supplementary reinforcement would probably have to be
scheduled in the more traditional way.
These requirements are not excessive, but they are probably
incompatible with the current realities of the classroom. In the
experimental study of learning it has been found that the contingencies
of reinforcement which are most efficient in controlling the organism
cannot be arranged through the personal mediation of the experimenter.
An organism is affected by subtle details of contingencies which are
beyond the capacity of the human organism to arrange. Mechanical and
electrical devices must be used. Mechanical help is also demanded by
the sheer number of contingencies which may be used efficiently in a
single experimental session. We have recorded many millions of
responses from a single organism during thousands of experimental
hours. Personal arrangement of the contingencies and personal
observation of the results are quite unthinkable. Now, the human
organism is, if anything, more sensitive to precise contingencies than
the other organisms we have studied. We have every reason to expect,
therefore, that the most effective control of human learning will require
instrumental aid. The simple fact is that, as a mere reinforcing
mechanism, the teacher is out of date. This would be true even if a
single teacher devoted all her time to a single child, but her inadequacy
is multiplied many-fold when she must serve as a reinforcing device to
many children at once. If the teacher is to take advantage of recent
advances in the study of learning, she must have the help of mechanical
devices.

A TEACHING MACHINE
The technical problem of providing the necessary instrumental aid is
not particularly difficult. There are many ways in which the necessary
contingencies may be arranged, either mechanically or electrically. An
inexpensive device which solves most of the principal problems has
already been constructed (Figure 1). It is still in the experimental stage,
but it suggests the kind of instrument which seems to be required. The
device is a box about the size of a small record player. On the top

surface is a window through which a question or problem printed on a
paper tape may be seen. The child answers the question by moving one
or more sliders upon which the digits 0 through 9 are printed. The
answer appears in square holes punched in the paper upon which the
question is printed. When the answer has been set, the child turns a
knob. The operation is as simple as adjusting a television set. If the
answer is right, the knob turns freely and can be made to ring a bell or
provide some other conditioned reinforcement. If the answer is wrong,
the knob will not turn. A counter may be added to tally wrong answers.
The knob must then be reversed slightly and a second attempt at a right
answer made. (Unlike the flash card, the device reports a wrong answer
without giving the right answer.) When the answer is right, a further
turn of the knob engages a clutch which moves the next problem into
place in the window. This movement cannot be completed, however,
until the sliders have been returned to zero.

FIGURE 1. An early machine to teach arithmetic. Material, such as an equation to be
completed, appears in the square window on a paper tape. Holes are punched in the
tape where figures are missing. The boy causes figures to appear in these holes by
moving sliders. When the proper sliders have been moved, the equation or other
material is complete. The boy then turns a knob on the front of the machine. The
machine senses the composed answer, and if it is correct, the knob turns freely and a
new frame of material moves into place. If the setting is wrong, the knob will not turn
and the positions of the sliders must then be corrected. A counter may be added to tally
wrong answers. (This machine was demonstrated at the University of Pittsburgh,
March, 1954.)

The important features of the device are these: reinforcement for the
right answer is immediate. The mere manipulation of the device will
probably be reinforcing enough to keep the average pupil at work for a
suitable period each day, provided traces of earlier aversive control can
be wiped out. A teacher may supervise an entire class at work on such

devices at the same time, yet each child may progress at his own rate,
completing as many problems as possible within the class period. If
forced to be away from school, he may return to pick up where he left
off. The gifted child will advance rapidly, but can be kept from getting
too far ahead either by being excused from arithmetic for a time or by
being given special sets of problems which take him into some of the
interesting bypaths of mathematics.
The device makes it possible to present carefully designed material
in which one problem can depend upon the answer to the preceding
problem and where, therefore, the most efficient progress to an
eventually complex repertoire can be made. Provision has been made
for recording the commonest mistakes so that the tapes can be modified
as experience dictates. Additional steps can be inserted where pupils
tend to have trouble, and ultimately the material will reach a point at
which the answers of the average child will almost always be right.
If the material itself proves not to be sufficiently reinforcing, other
reinforcers in the possession of the teacher or school may be made
contingent upon the operation of the device or upon progress through a
series of problems. Supplemental reinforcement would not sacrifice the
advantages gained from immediate reinforcement and from the
possibility of constructing an optimal series of steps which approach
the complex repertoire of mathematical behavior most efficiently.

FIGURE 2. A machine to teach spelling and arithmetic similar to that in Figure 1
except that there are more sliders and letters can be presented as well as figures.
Material appears in the rectangular opening with one or more figures or letters missing.
When the sliders have been moved to complete the material, the pupil turns a crank as
shown. If the setting is correct, a new frame of material moves into place and the
sliders return to their home position. If the material is wrong, the sliders return but the
frame remains and another setting must be made.

A similar device in which the sliders carry the letters of the alphabet
has been designed to teach spelling (Figure 2). In addition to the
advantages which can be gained from precise reinforcement and careful
programming, the device will teach reading at the same time. It can
also be used to establish the large and important repertoire of verbal
relationships encountered in logic and science. In short, it can teach
verbal thinking. The device can also be operated as a multiple-choice
self-rater.
Some objections to the use of such devices in the classroom can
easily be foreseen. The cry will be raised that the child is being treated
as a mere animal and that an essentially human intellectual

achievement is being analyzed in unduly mechanistic terms.
Mathematical behavior is usually regarded, not as a repertoire of
responses involving numbers and numerical operations, but as
evidences of mathematical ability or the exercise of the power of
reason. It is true that the techniques which are emerging from the
experimental study of learning are not designed to “develop the mind”
or to further some vague “understanding” of mathematical
relationships. They are designed, on the contrary, to establish the very
behaviors which are taken to be the evidences of such mental states or
processes. This is only a special case of the general change which is
under way in the interpretation of human affairs. An advancing science
continues to offer more and more convincing alternatives to traditional
formulations. The behavior in terms of which human thinking must
eventually be defined is worth treating in its own right as the
substantial goal of education.
Of course the teacher has a more important function than to say right
or wrong. The changes proposed should free her for the effective
exercise of that function. Marking a set of papers in arithmetic—“Yes,
nine and six are fifteen; no, nine and seven are not eighteen”—is
beneath the dignity of any intelligent person. There is more important
work to be done-in which the teacher’s relations to the pupil cannot be
duplicated by a mechanical device. Instrumental help would merely
improve these relations. One might say that the main trouble with
education in the lower grades today is that the child is obviously not
competent and knows it and that the teacher is unable to do anything
about it and knows that too. If the advances which have recently been
made in our control of behavior can give the child a genuine
competence in reading, writing, spelling, and arithmetic, then the
teacher may begin to function, not in lieu of a cheap machine, but
through intellectual, cultural, and emotional contacts of that distinctive
sort which testify to her status as a human being.
Another possible objection is that mechanized instruction will mean
technological unemployment. We need not worry about this until there
are enough teachers to go around and until the hours and energy
demanded of the teacher are comparable to those in other fields of
employment. Mechanical devices will eliminate the more tiresome
labors of the teacher but they will not necessarily shorten the time
during which she remains in contact with the pupil.
A more practical objection: Can we afford to mechanize our
schools? The answer is clearly Yes. The device I have just described

could be produced as cheaply as a small radio or phonograph. There
would need to be far fewer devices than pupils, for they could be used
in rotation. But even if we suppose that the instrument eventually found
to be most effective would cost several hundred dollars and that large
numbers of them would be required, our economy should be able to
stand the strain. Once we have accepted the possibility and the
necessity of mechanical help in the classroom, the economic problem
can easily be surmounted. There is no reason why the schoolroom
should be any less mechanized than, for example, the kitchen. A
country which annually produces millions of refrigerators, dishwashers,
automatic washing machines, automatic clothes driers, and automatic
garbage disposers can certainly afford the equipment necessary to
educate its citizens to high standards of competence in the most
effective way.
There is a simple job to be done. The task can be stated in concrete
terms. The necessary techniques are known. The equipment needed can
easily be provided. Nothing stands in the way but cultural inertia. But
what is more characteristic of the modern temper than an unwillingness
to accept the traditional as inevitable? We are on the threshold of an
exciting and revolutionary period, in which the scientific study of man
will be put to work in man’s best interests. Education must play its part.
It must accept the fact that a sweeping revision of educational practices
is possible and inevitable. When it has done this, we may look forward
with confidence to a school system which is aware of the nature of its
tasks, secure in its methods, and generously supported by the informed
and effective citizens whom education itself will create.
1

Obviously this is not the “new math,” but a similar analysis might be made of any material

suitable for the same grades.

3

TEACHING MACHINES
There are more people in the world than ever before, and a far greater
part of them want an education. The demand cannot be met simply by
building more schools and training more teachers. Education must
become more efficient. To this end curricula must be revised and
simplified, and textbooks and classroom techniques improved. In any
other field a demand for increased production would have led at once
to the invention of laborsaving capital equipment. Education has
reached this stage very late, possibly through a misconception of its
task. Thanks to the advent of television, however, the so-called
audiovisual aids are being re-examined. Film projectors, television sets,
phonographs, and tape recorders are finding their way into American
schools and colleges.
Audiovisual aids supplement and may even supplant lectures,
demonstrations, and textbooks. In doing so they serve one function of
the teacher: they present material to the student and, when successful,
make it so clear and interesting that the student learns. There is another
function to which they contribute little or nothing. It is best seen in the
productive interchange between teacher and student in the small
classroom or tutorial situation. Much of that interchange has already
been sacrificed in modern education in order to teach large numbers of
students. There is a real danger that it will be wholly obscured if use of
equipment designed simply to present material becomes widespread.
The student is becoming more and more a mere passive receiver of
instruction.
Another kind of capital equipment will encourage the student to take
an active role in the instructional process. The possibility was
recognized in the 1920’s, when Sidney L. Pressey designed several
machines for the automatic testing of intelligence and information (35).
A recent model of one of these is shown in Figure 3. In using the
device the student refers to a numbered item in a multiple-choice test.
He presses the button corresponding to his first choice of answer. If he
is right, the device moves on to the next item; if he is wrong, the error
1
is tallied, and he must continue to make choices until he is right. Such
machines, Pressey pointed out, could not only test and score, they
could teach. When an examination is corrected and returned after a
delay of many hours or days, the student’s behavior is not appreciably

modified. The immediate report supplied by a self-scoring device,
however, can have an important instructional effect. Pressey also
pointed out that such machines would increase efficiency in another
way. Even in a small classroom the teacher usually knows that he is
moving too slowly for some students and too fast for others. Those who
could go faster are penalized, and those who should go slower are
poorly taught and unnecessarily punished by criticism and failure.
Machine instruction would permit each student to proceed at his own
rate.
The “industrial revolution in education” which Pressey envisioned
stubbornly refused to come about. In 1932 he expressed his
disappointment.

FIGURE 3. A recent model of Pressey’s “apparatus which gives tests and scores—and
teaches.” A number appearing in the window marked “item” directs the student to an
item in a multiple-choice test. The student presses the key corresponding to his choice
of answer. When he presses the correct key, the device advances to the next item.
Errors are totaled.

The problems of invention are relatively simple. With a little money
and engineering resource, a great deal could easily be done. The writer
has found from bitter experience that one person alone can accomplish
relatively little and he is regretfully dropping further work on these
problems. But he hopes that enough may have been done to stimulate
other workers, that this fascinating field may be developed (36).
Pressey’s machines succumbed in part to cultural inertia; the world
of education was not ready for them. But they also had limitations
which probably contributed to their failure. Pressey was working
against a background of psychological theory which had not come to

grips with the learning process. The study of human learning was
dominated by the “memory drum” and similar devices originally
designed to study forgetting. Rate of learning was observed, but little
was done to change it. Why the subject of such an experiment bothered
to learn at all was of little interest. Frequency and recency theories of
learning and principles of massed and spaced practice concerned the
conditions under which responses were remembered.
Pressey’s machines were designed against this theoretical
background. As versions of the memory drum, they were primarily
testing devices. They were to be used after some amount of learning
had already taken place elsewhere. By confirming correct responses
and by weakening responses which should not have been acquired, a
self-testing machine does, indeed, teach; but it is not designed
primarily for that purpose. Nevertheless, Pressey seems to have been
the first to emphasize the importance of immediate feedback in
education and to propose a system in which each student could move at
his own pace. He saw the need for capital equipment in realizing these
objectives. Above all he conceived of a machine which (in contrast
with the audiovisual aids which were beginning to be developed)
permitted the student to play an active role.

OTHER KINDS OF TEACHING MACHINES
The learning process is now much better understood. Much of what
we know has come from studying the behavior of lower organisms, but
the results hold surprisingly well for human subjects. The emphasis in
this research has not been on proving or disproving theories but on
discovering and controlling the variables of which learning is a
function. This practical orientation has paid off, for a surprising degree
of control has been achieved. By arranging appropriate contingencies
of reinforcement, specific forms of behavior can be set up and brought
under the control of specific classes of stimuli. The resulting behavior
can be maintained in strength for long periods of time. A technology
based on this work has already been put to use in neurology,
pharmacology, nutrition, psychophysics, psychiatry, and elsewhere (60,
21, 48).
The analysis is also relevant to education. A student is “taught” in
the sense that he is induced to engage in new forms of behavior and in
specific forms upon specific occasions. It is not merely a matter of

teaching him what to do; we are as much concerned with the
probability that appropriate behavior will, indeed, appear at the proper
time—an issue which would be classed traditionally under motivation.
In education the behavior to be shaped and maintained is usually
verbal, and it is to be brought under the control of both verbal and
nonverbal stimuli. Fortunately, the special problems raised by verbal
behavior can be submitted to a similar analysis (47).
If our current knowledge of the acquisition and maintenance of
verbal behavior is to be applied to education, some sort of teaching
machine is needed. Contingencies of reinforcement which change the
behavior of lower organisms often cannot be arranged by hand; rather
elaborate apparatus is needed. The human organism requires even more
subtle instrumentation. An appropriate teaching machine will have
several important features. The student must compose his response
rather than select it from a set of alternatives, as in a multiple-choice
self-rater. One reason for this is that we want him to recall rather than
recognize—to make a response as well as see that it is right. Another
reason is that effective multiple-choice material must contain plausible
wrong responses, which are out of place in the delicate process of
2
“shaping” behavior because they strengthen unwanted forms.
Although it is much easier to build a machine to score multiple-choice
answers than to evaluate a composed response, the technical advantage
is outweighed by these and other considerations.
A second requirement of a minimal teaching machine also
distinguishes it from earlier versions. In acquiring complex behavior
the student must pass through a carefully designed sequence of steps,
often of considerable length. Each step must be so small that it can
always be taken, yet in taking it the student moves somewhat closer to
fully competent behavior. The machine must make sure that these steps
are taken in a carefully prescribed order.
Several machines with the required characteristics have been built
and tested. Sets of separate presentations or “frames” of visual material
are stored on disks, cards, or tapes. One frame is presented at a time,
adjacent frames being out of sight. In the machine shown in Figure 2,
page 25, the student composes a response by moving printed figures or
letters, and his setting is compared by the machine with a coded
response. For more advanced students—from junior high school, say,
through college—such a machine is unnecessarily rigid in specifying
form of response. Fortunately, such students may be asked to compare

their responses with printed material revealed by the machine. In the
machine shown in Figure 4, material is printed in 30 radial frames on a
12-inch disk. The student inserts the disk and closes the machine. He
cannot proceed until the machine has been locked, and once he has
begun, the machine cannot be unlocked. All but a corner of one frame
is visible through a window. The student writes his response on a paper
strip exposed through a second opening. By lifting a lever on the front
of the machine, he moves what he has written under a transparent cover
and uncovers the correct response in the remaining corner of the frame.
If the two responses correspond, he moves the lever horizontally. This
movement punches a hole in the paper opposite his response, recording
the fact that he called it correct, and alters the machine so that the
frame will not appear again when the student works around the disk a
second time. Whether the response was correct or not, a second frame
appears when the lever is returned to its starting position. The student
proceeds in this way until he has responded to all frames. He then
works around the disk a second time, but only those frames appear to
which he has not correctly responded. When the disk revolves without
stopping, the assignment is finished. (The student is asked to repeat
each frame until a correct response is made to allow for the fact that, in
telling him that a response is wrong, such a machine tells him what is
right.)

FIGURE 4. Machine first used to teach part of the author’s course at Harvard
University. (An indexing phonograph to supply auditory stimuli is shown on the right.)
Material is printed on the segments of a disk. The student inserts a disk in the machine
and closes it; the machine cannot then be opened until he has completed the work. One
frame of material appears in the window near the center. The student writes his
response on a strip of paper exposed at the right. By lifting a lever at the left of the
front side of the machine, the student moves the response he has written under a
transparent cover and uncovers the correct response in the upper corner of the central
frame. If his response is correct, he moves the lever to the right, thus punching a hole
alongside the response he has called correct and altering the machine so that that
particular frame will not appear again when he works around the disk a second time.
When the lever is returned to its starting position, a new frame appears. (This machine
was demonstrated at the annual meeting of the American Psychological Association,
September, 1957.)

When the machine was designed, the power of programming had not
yet been fully appreciated. It was assumed that the student would make
many mistakes and would need to see many frames a second time. (The
machine was, in fact, designed to require two correct responses to each
frame if necessary.) As programming improved, a second chance
became less important. A simpler machine was devised which had
other advantages: a set of frames was not limited by the number of
spaces on a disk, frames were larger, and so on. Such a machine is
shown in Figure 5. The material is stored on fan-folded paper tapes,
and the student writes on a separate strip. He sees printed material in
the large window at the left and writes his response on the uncovered

strip at the right. By moving a slider he then covers the response he has
written with a transparent mask and uncovers additional material in the
larger opening. This may tell him that his response is wrong without
telling him what is right. For example, it may list a few of the
commonest errors, one of which may be his response. He makes a
second response if necessary on a newly uncovered portion of the paper
strip. This is covered by a further operation of the machine, which
uncovers the correct response. He records an error by punching a hole
alongside his response, leaving a record for the instructor and operating
a counter which becomes visible at the end of the set. The student may
record the number of mistakes he has made and perhaps compare it
with a par score.
The machine itself, of course, does not teach. It simply brings the
student into contact with the person who composed the material it
presents. It is a laborsaving device because it can bring one
programmer into contact with an indefinite number of students. This
may suggest mass production, but the effect upon each student is
surprisingly like that of a private tutor. The comparison holds in several
respects. (1) There is a constant interchange between program and
student. Unlike lectures, textbooks, and the usual audiovisual aids, the
machine induces sustained activity. The student is always alert and
busy. (2) Like a good tutor, the machine insists that a given point be
thoroughly understood, either frame by frame or set by set, before the
student moves on. Lectures, textbooks, and their mechanized
equivalents, on the other hand, proceed without making sure that the
student understands and easily leave him behind. (3) Like a good tutor
the machine presents just that material for which the student is ready. It
asks him to take only that step which he is at the moment best equipped
and most likely to take. (4) Like a skillful tutor the machine helps the
student to come up with the right answer. It does this in part through
the orderly construction of the program and in part with such
techniques as hinting, prompting, and suggesting, derived from an
analysis of verbal behavior (47). (5) Lastly, of course, the machine, like
the private tutor, reinforces the student for every correct response,
using this immediate feedback not only to shape his behavior most
efficiently but to maintain it in strength in a manner which the layman
would describe as “holding the student’s interest.”

FIGURE 5. A machine similar to that in Figure 4. Material appears in the window at
the left. The student is writing his response on a strip of paper exposed through the
small window at the right. By moving a sliding knob at the upper right, he draws a
transparent cover over his response and uncovers additional material at the right end of
the larger window. This may tell him whether or not his response was correct, often
without telling him the correct response. It may also supply additional material. The
same movement of the slider uncovers additional space on the strip of paper upon
which the student writes a second response if necessary. A further movement of the
slider draws a transparent cover over the second response and uncovers the correct
response in the large window. A new frame of the material, which is printed on a fanfolded tape, is moved into place by turning the large knob near the student’s left hand.
The machine cannot be operated until tightly closed and cannot again be opened except
by punching a hole in the answer strip. The panel at the rear may hold material to
which the program refers.

PROGRAMMED MATERIALS

The success of such a machine depends on the material used in it.
The task of programming a given subject is at first sight rather
formidable. Many helpful techniques can be derived from a general
analysis of the relevant behavioral processes, verbal and nonverbal.
Specific forms of behavior are to be evoked and, through differential
reinforcement, brought under the control of specific stimuli. This is not
the place for a systematic review of available techniques, or of the kind
of research which may be expected to discover others. However, the
machines themselves cannot be adequately described without giving a
few examples of programs. We may begin with a set of frames (see
Table 1) designed to teach a third-or fourth-grade pupil to spell the
word manufacture. The six frames are presented in the order shown,
and the pupil moves sliders to expose letters in the open squares.
TABLE 1. A set of frames designed to teach a third-or fourthgrade pupil to spell the word manufacture

The word to be learned appears in bold face in frame 1, with an
example and a simple definition. The pupil’s first task is simply to copy
it. When he does so correctly, frame 2 appears. He must now copy
selectively: he must identify “fact” as the common part of
“manufacture” and “factory.” This helps him to spell the word and also
to acquire a separable “atomic” verbal operant (47). In frame 3 another
root must be copied selectively from “manual.” In frame 4 the pupil
must for the first time insert letters without copying. Since he is asked

to insert the same letter in two places, a wrong response will be doubly
conspicuous, and the chance of failure is thereby minimized. The same
principle governs frame 5. In frame 6 the pupil spells the word to
complete the sentence used as an example in frame 1. Even a poor
student is likely to do this correctly because he has just composed or
completed the word five times, has made two important root-responses,
and has learned that two letters occur in the word twice. He has
probably learned to spell the word without having made a mistake.
Teaching spelling is mainly a process of shaping complex forms of
behavior. In other subjects—for example, arithmetic—the same
machine can be used to bring responses under the control of
appropriate stimuli. Unfortunately the material which has been
prepared for teaching arithmetic does not lend itself to excerpting. The
numbers 0 through 9 are generated in relation to objects, quantities, and
scales. The operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and
division are thoroughly developed before the number 10 is reached. In
the course of this the pupil composes equations and expressions in a
great variety of alternative forms. He completes not only 5 + 4 =

,

but
+ 4 = 9, 5
4 = 9, and so on, aided in most cases by
illustrative materials. No appeal is made to rote memorizing, even in
the later acquisition of the tables. The student is expected to arrive at 9
× 7 = 63, not by memorizing it as he would memorize a line of poetry,
but by putting into practice such principles as that nine times a number
is the same as ten times the number minus the number (both of these
being “obvious” or already well learned), that the digits in a multiple of
nine add to nine, that in composing successive multiples of nine one
counts backwards (nine, eighteen, twenty-seven, thirty-six, and so on),
that nine times a single digit is a number beginning with one less than
the digit (nine times six is fifty something), and possibly even that the
product of two numbers separated by only one number is equal to the
square of the separating numbers minus one (the square of eight
already being familiar from a special series of frames concerned with
squares).
Programs of this sort run to great length. At five or six frames per
word, four grades of spelling may require 20,000 or 25,000 frames, and
three or four grades of arithmetic, as many again. If these figures seem
large, it is only because we are thinking of the normal contact between
teacher and pupil. Admittedly, a teacher cannot supervise 10,000 or
15,000 responses made by each pupil per year. But the pupil’s time is

not so limited. In any case, surprisingly little time is needed. Fifteen
minutes per day on a machine should suffice for each of these
programs, the machines being free for other students for the rest of
each day. (It is probably because traditional methods are so inefficient
that we have been led to suppose that education requires such a
prodigious part of a young person’s day.)
A simple technique used in programming material at the high-school
or college level, by means of the machine shown in Figure 4, is
exemplified in teaching a student to recite a poem. The first line is
presented with several unimportant letters omitted. The student must
read the line “meaningfully” and supply the missing letters. The
second, third, and fourth frames present succeeding lines in the same
way. In the fifth frame the first line reappears with other letters also
missing. Since the student has recently read the line, he can complete it
correctly. He does the same for the second, third, and fourth lines.
Subsequent frames are increasingly incomplete, and eventually—say,
after 20 or 24 frames—the student reproduces all four lines without
external help, and quite possibly without having made a wrong
response. The technique is similar to that used in teaching spelling:
responses are first controlled by a text, but this is slowly reduced
(colloquially, “vanished”) until the responses can be emitted without a
text, each member in a series of responses being now under the
“intraverbal” control of their members.
Vanishing can be used in teaching other types of verbal behavior.
When a student describes the geography of part of the world or the
anatomy of part of the body, or names plants and animals from
specimens or pictures, verbal responses are controlled by nonverbal
stimuli. In setting up such behavior the student is first asked to report
features of a fully labeled map, picture, or object, and the labels are
then vanished. In teaching a map, for example, the machine asks the
student to describe spatial relations among geographical features, such
3
as cities, countries, and rivers, as shown on a fully labeled map. He is
then asked to do the same with a map in which the names are
incomplete or, possibly, lacking. Eventually he is asked to report the
same relations with no map at all. If the material has been well
programmed, he can do so correctly. Instruction is sometimes
concerned not so much with imparting a new repertoire of verbal
responses as with getting the student to describe something accurately
in any available terms. The machine can “make sure the student

understands” a graph, diagram, chart, or picture by asking him to
identify and explain its features—correcting him, of course, whenever
he is wrong.
In addition to charts, maps, graphs, models, and so on, the student
may have access to auditory material. In learning to take dictation in a
foreign language, for example, he selects a short passage on an
indexing phonograph according to instructions given by the machine.
He listens to the passage as often as necessary and then transcribes it.
The machine then reveals the correct text. The student may listen to the
passage again to discover the sources of any error. The indexing
phonograph may also be used with the machine to teach other language
skills, as well as telegraphic code, music, speech, parts of literary and
dramatic appreciation, and other subjects.
A typical program combines many of these functions. The set of
frames shown in Table 2 is designed to induce the student of highschool physics to talk intelligently, and to some extent technically,
about the emission of light from an incandescent source. In using the
machine the student will write a word or phrase to complete a given
item and then uncover the corresponding word or phrase shown here in
the column at the right. The reader who wishes to get the feel of the
material should cover the right-hand column with a card, uncovering
each line only after he has completed the corresponding item.
Several programming techniques are exemplified by the set of
frames in Table 2. Technical terms are introduced slowly. For example,
the familiar term “fine wire” in frame 2 is followed by a definition of
the technical term “filament” in frame 4; “filament” is then asked for in
the presence of the nonscientific synonym in frame 5 and without the
synonym in frame 9. In the same way “glow,” “give off light,” and
“send out light” in early frames are followed by a definition of “emit”
with a synonym in frame 7. Various inflected forms of “emit” then
follow, and “emit” itself is asked for without a synonym but in a
helpful phrase in frame 30, and “emitted” and “emission” are asked for
without help in frames 33 and 34. The relation between temperature
and amount and color of light is developed in several frames before a
formal statement using the word “temperature” is asked for in frame
12. “Incandescent” is defined and used in frame 13, is used again in
frame 14, and is asked for in frame 15, the student receiving the
thematic prompt from the recurring phrase “incandescent source of
light.” A formal prompt is supplied by “candle.” In frame 25 the new
response “energy” is easily evoked by the words “form of …” because

the expression “form of energy” is used earlier in the frame. “Energy”
appears again in the next two frames and is finally asked for, without
aid, in frame 28. Frames 30 through 35 discuss the limiting
temperatures of incandescent objects, while reviewing several kinds of
sources. The figure 800 is used in three frames. Two intervening
frames then permit some time to pass before the response “800” is
asked for.
TABLE 2. Part of a program in high-school physics. The machine
presents one item at a time. The student completes the item and
then uncovers the corresponding word or phrase shown at the
right.

Unwanted responses are eliminated with special techniques. If, for
example, the second sentence in frame 24 were simply “It is a(n)____
source of light,” the two “very’s” would frequently lead the student to
fill the blank with “strong” or a synonym thereof. This is prevented by
inserting the word “powerful” to make a synonym redundant.
Similarly, in frame 3 the words “heat and” preempt the response
“heat,” which would otherwise correctly fill the blank.
The net effect of such material is more than the acquisition of facts
and terms. Beginning with a largely unverbalized acquaintance with
such things as flashlights and candles, the student is induced to talk
about familiar events, together with a few new facts, with a fairly

technical vocabulary. He applies the same terms to facts which he may
never before have seen to be similar. The emission of light from an
incandescent source takes shape as a topic or field of inquiry. An
understanding of the subject emerges which is often quite surprising in
view of the fragmentation required in item building.

THE CONSTRUCTION OF A PROGRAM
Where a confusing or elliptical passage in a textbook is forgivable
because it can be clarified by the teacher, machine material must be
self-contained and wholly adequate. There are other reasons why
textbooks, lecture outlines, and film scripts are of little help in
preparing a program. They are usually not logical or developmental
arrangements of material but strategies which the authors have found
successful under existing classroom conditions. The examples they
give are more often chosen to hold the student’s interest than to clarify
terms and principles. In composing material for the machine, the
programmer may go directly to the point.
A first step is to define the field. A second is to collect technical
terms, facts, laws, principles, and cases. These must then be arranged in
a plausible developmental order—linear if possible, branching if
necessary. A mechanical arrangement, such as a card-filing system,
helps. The material is distributed among the frames of a program to
achieve an arbitrary density. In the final composition of an item,
techniques for strengthening asked-for responses and for transferring
control from one variable to another are chosen from a list according to
a given schedule in order to prevent the establishment of irrelevant
verbal tendencies appropriate to a single technique. When one set of
frames has been composed, its terms and facts are seeded mechanically
among succeeding sets, where they will again be referred to in
composing later items to make sure that the earlier repertoire remains
active. Thus, the technical terms, facts, and examples in Table 2 have
been distributed for reuse in succeeding sets on reflection, absorption,
and transmission, where they are incorporated into items dealing
mainly with other matters. Sets of frames for explicit review can, of
course, be constructed. Further research will presumably discover
other, possibly more effective, techniques. Meanwhile, it must be
admitted that a considerable measure of art is needed in composing a
successful program.

Whether good programming is to remain an art or to become a
scientific technology, it is reassuring to know that there is a final
authority—the student. An unexpected advantage of machine
instruction has proved to be the feedback to the programmer. In the
elementary school machine (Figure 2), provision is made for
discovering which frames commonly yield wrong responses, and in the
high-school and college machines (Figures 3 and 4), the paper strips
bearing written answers are available for analysis. A trial run of the
first version of a program quickly reveals frames which need to be
altered or sequences which need to be lengthened. One or two revisions
in the light of a few dozen responses work a great improvement. No
comparable feedback is available to the lecturer, textbook writer, or
maker of films. Although one text or film may seem to be better than
another, it is usually impossible to say, for example, that a given
sentence on a given page or a particular sequence in a film is causing
trouble.
Difficult as programming is, it has its compensations. It is a salutary
thing to try to guarantee a right response at every step in the
presentation of a subject matter. The programmer will usually find that
he has been accustomed to leave much to the student—that he has
frequently omitted essential steps and neglected to invoke relevant
points. The responses made to his material may reveal surprising
ambiguities. Unless he is lucky, he may find that he still has something
to learn about his subject. He will almost certainly find that he needs to
learn a great deal more about the behavioral changes he is trying to
induce in the student. This effect of the machine in confronting the
programmer with the full scope of his task may in itself produce a
considerable improvement in education.
Composing a set of frames can be an exciting exercise in the analysis
of knowledge. The enterprise has obvious bearings on scientific
methodology. There are hopeful signs that the epistemological
implications will induce experts to help in composing programs. The
expert may be interested for another reason. We can scarcely ask a
topflight mathematician to write a primer in second-grade arithmetic if
it is to be used by the average teacher in the average classroom. But a
carefully controlled machine presentation and the resulting immediacy
of contact between programmer and student offer a very different
prospect, which may be enough to induce those who know most about
the subject to give some thought to the nature of arithmetical behavior
and to the various forms in which such behavior should be set up and

tested.

CAN MATERIAL BE TOO EASY?
The traditional teacher may view these programs with concern. He
may be particularly alarmed by the effort to maximize success and
minimize failure. He has found that students do not pay attention unless
they are worried about the consequences of their work. The customary
procedure has been to maintain the necessary anxiety by inducing
errors. In recitation, the student who obviously knows the answer is not
too often asked; a test item which is correctly answered by everyone is
discarded as non discriminating; problems at the end of a section in a
textbook in mathematics generally include one or two very difficult
items. (The teacher-turned-programmer may be surprised to find this
attitude affecting the construction of items. For example, he may find it
difficult to allow an item to stand which “gives the point away.” Yet if
we can solve the motivational problem with other means, what is more
effective than giving a point away?) Making sure that the student
knows that he doesn’t know is a technique concerned with motivation,
not with the learning process. Machines solve the problem of
motivation in other ways. There is no evidence that what is easily
learned is more readily forgotten. If this should prove to be the case,
retention may be guaranteed by subsequent material constructed for an
equally painless review.
The standard defense of “hard” material is that we want to teach
more than subject matter. The student is to be challenged and taught to
“think.” The argument is sometimes little more than a rationalization
for a confusing presentation, but it is doubtless true that lectures and
texts are often inadequate and misleading by design. But to what end?
What sort of thinking does the student learn in struggling through
difficult material? It is true that those who learn under difficult
conditions are better students, but are they better because they have
surmounted difficulties or do they surmount them because they are
better? In the guise of teaching thinking we set difficult and confusing
situations and claim credit for the students who deal with them
successfully.
The trouble with deliberately making education difficult in order to
teach thinking is (1) that we must remain content with the students thus
selected, even though we know that they are only a small part of the

potential supply of thinkers, and (2) that we must continue to sacrifice
the teaching of subject matter by renouncing effective but easier
methods. A more sensible program is to analyze the behavior called
thinking and produce it according to specifications. A program
specifically concerned with such behavior could be composed of
material already available in logic, mathematics, scientific method, and
psychology. Much would doubtless be added in completing an
effective program. The machine has already yielded important relevant
by-products. Immediate feedback encourages a more careful reading of
programmed material than is the case in studying a text, where the
consequences of attention or inattention are so long deferred that they
have little effect on reading skills. The behavior involved in observing
or attending to detail—as in inspecting charts and models or listening
closely to recorded speech—is efficiently shaped by the contingencies
arranged by the machine. And when an immediate result is in the
balance, a student will be more likely to learn how to marshal relevant
material, to concentrate on specific features of a presentation, to reject
irrelevant materials, to refuse the easy but wrong solution, and to
tolerate indecision, all of which are involved in effective thinking (see
Chapter 6).
Part of the objection to easy material is that the student will come to
depend on the machine and will be less able than ever to cope with the
inefficient presentations of lectures, textbooks, films, and “real life.”
This is indeed a problem. All good teachers must “wean” their students,
and the machine is no exception. The better the teacher, the more
explicit must the weaning process be. The final stages of a program
must be so designed that the student no longer requires the helpful
conditions arranged by the machine. This can be done in many ways—
among others by using the machine to discuss material which has been
studied in other forms. These are questions which can be adequately
answered only by further research.

A PRACTICAL TEST

FIGURE 6. Part of the self-instruction room in Sever Hall, Harvard University.

The self-instruction room shown in Figure 6 contains ten machines
and has been used to teach part of a course in human behavior to
Harvard and Radcliffe undergraduates. Nearly 200 students completed
48 disks (about 1400 frames), corresponding to about 200 pages of the
text. The median time required to finish 48 disks was 14% hours. The
students were not examined on the material but were responsible for
the text which overlapped it. Their reactions to the material and to selfinstruction in general were studied through interviews and
questionnaires. Both the machines and the material were then modified
4
in the light of this experience.
The expected advantages of machine instruction were generously
confirmed. Unsuspected possibilities were revealed. Although it is less
convenient to report to a self-instruction room than to pick up a
textbook in one’s room or elsewhere, most students felt that they had
much to gain in studying by machine. Most of them worked for an hour
or more with little effort, although they often felt tired afterwards, and
they reported that they learned much more in less time and with less
effort than in conventional ways. No attempt was made to point out the
relevance of the material to crucial issues, personal or otherwise, but
the students remained interested. An important advantage proved to be

that the student always knew where he stood, without waiting for an
hour test or final examination.

SOME QUESTIONS
Several questions are commonly asked when teaching machines are
discussed. Cannot the results of laboratory research on learning be used
in education without machines? Of course they can. They should lead
to improvements in textbooks, films, and other teaching materials.
Moreover, the teacher who really understands the conditions under
which learning takes place will be more effective, not only in teaching
subject matter but in managing a class. Nevertheless, some sort of
device is necessary to arrange the subtle contingencies of reinforcement
required for optimal learning if each student is to have individual
attention. In nonverbal skills this is usually obvious; texts and
instructor can guide the learner but they cannot arrange the final
contingencies which set up skilled behavior. It is true that the verbal
skills at issue here are especially dependent upon social reinforcement,
but it must not be forgotten that the machine simply mediates an
essentially verbal relation. In shaping and maintaining verbal
knowledge we are not committed to the contingencies arranged through
immediate personal contact.
Machines may still seem unnecessarily complex compared with
other mediators such as workbooks or self-scoring test forms.
Unfortunately, these alternatives are not acceptable. When material is
adequately programmed, adjacent steps are often so similar that one
frame reveals the response to another. Only some sort of mechanical
presentation will make successive frames independent of each other.
Moreover, in self-instruction an automatic record of the student’s
behavior is especially desirable, and for many purposes it should be
foolproof. Simplified versions of the present machines have been found
useful, but the mechanical and economic problems are so easily solved
that a machine with greater capabilities is fully warranted.
Will machines replace teachers? On the contrary, they are capital
equipment to be used by teachers to save time and labor. In assigning
certain mechanizable functions to machines, the teacher emerges in his
proper role as an indispensable human being. He may teach more
students than heretofore—this is probably inevitable if the worldwide
demand for education is to be satisfied—but he will do so in fewer

hours and with fewer burdensome chores. In return for his greater
productivity he can ask society to improve his economic condition.
The role of the teacher may well be changed, for machine instruction
will affect several traditional practices. Students may continue to be
grouped in “grades” or “classes,” but it will be possible for each to
proceed at his own level, advancing as rapidly as he can. The other
kind of “grade” will also change its meaning. In traditional practice a C
means that a student has a smattering of a whole course. But if machine
instruction assures mastery at every stage, a grade will be useful only in
showing how far a student has gone. C might mean that he is halfway
through a course. Given enough time he will be able to get an A; and
since A is no longer a motivating device, this is fair enough. The quick
student will meanwhile have picked up A’s in other subjects.
Differences in ability raise other questions. A program designed for
the slowest student in the school system will probably not seriously
delay the fast student, who will be free to progress at his own speed.
(He may profit from the full coverage by filling in unsuspected gaps in
his repertoire.) If this does not prove to be the case, programs can be
constructed at two or more levels, and students can be shifted from one
to the other as performances dictate. If there are also differences in
“types of thinking,” the extra time available for machine instruction
may be used to present a subject in ways appropriate to many types.
Each student will presumably retain and use those ways which he finds
most useful. The kind of individual difference which arises simply
because a student has missed part of an essential sequence (compare
the child who has no “mathematical ability” because he was out with
the measles when fractions were first taken up) will simply be
eliminated.
Self-instruction by machine has many special advantages apart from
educational institutions. Home study is an obvious case. In industrial
and military training it is often inconvenient to schedule students in
groups, and individual instruction by machine should be a feasible
alternative. Programs can also be constructed in subjects for which
teachers are not available—for example, when new kinds of equipment
must be explained to operators and repairmen, or where a sweeping
change in method finds teachers unprepared. Education sometimes fails
because students have handicaps which make a normal relationship
with a teacher difficult or impossible. (Many blind children are treated
today as feebleminded because no one has had the time or patience to
make contact with them. Deaf-mutes, spastics, and others suffer similar

handicaps.) A teaching machine can be adapted to special kinds of
communication—as, for example, Braille. Above all, it has infinite
patience.

THE FUTURE
An analysis of education within the framework of a science of
behavior has broad implications. Our schools, in particular our
“progressive” schools, are often held responsible for many current
problems—including juvenile delinquency and the threat of a more
powerful foreign technology. One remedy frequently suggested is a
return to older techniques, especially to greater “discipline” in schools.
Presumably this is to be obtained with some form of punishment, to be
administered either with certain classical instruments of physical injury
—the dried bullock’s tail of the Greek teacher or the cane of the
English schoolmaster—or as disapproval or failure, the frequency of
which is to be increased by “raising standards,” (see Chapter 5). This is
probably not a feasible solution. Not only education but Western
culture as a whole is moving away from aversive practices. We cannot
prepare young people for one kind of life in institutions organized on
quite different principles. The discipline of the birch rod may facilitate
learning, but we must remember that it also breeds followers of
dictators and revolutionists.
In the light of our present knowledge a school system must be called
a failure if it cannot induce students to learn except by threatening them
for not learning. That this has always been the standard pattern simply
emphasizes the importance of modern techniques. John Dewey was
speaking for his culture and his time when he attacked aversive
educational practices and appealed to teachers to turn to positive and
humane methods. What he threw out should have been thrown out.
Unfortunately he had too little to put in its place. Progressive education
has been a temporizing measure which can now be effectively
supplemented. Not only can aversive practices be replaced, they can be
replaced with far more powerful techniques. The possibilities should be
thoroughly explored if we are to build an educational system which
will meet the present demand without sacrificing democratic principles.
1

The Navy’s “Self-Rater” is a larger version of Pressey’s machine. The items are printed on

code-punched plastic cards fed by the machine. The time required to answer is taken into account

in scoring.
2
“Those who have written multiple-choice tests know how much time, energy, and ingenuity
are needed to construct plausible wrong answers. (They must be plausible or the test will be of
little value.) In a multiple-choice test, they may do no harm, since a student who has already
learned the right answer may reject wrong answers with ease and possibly with no undesirable
side-effects. The student who is learning, however, can scarcely avoid trouble. Traces of
erroneous responses survive in spite of the correction of errors or the confirmation of a right
answer. In multiple-choice material designed to teach literary appreciation, for example, the
student is asked to consider three or four plausible paraphrases of a passage in a poem and to
identify the most acceptable. But as the student reads and considers inacceptable paraphrases, the
very processes the poet used to get an effect are at work to destroy it. Neither the vigorous
correction of wrong choices nor the confirmation of a right choice will free the student of the
verbal and nonverbal associations thus generated.
Scientific subjects offer more specific examples. Consider an item such as the following, which
might be part of a course in high school physics:
As the pressure of a gas increases, volume decreases. This is because:
(a) the space between the molecules grows smaller
(b) the molecules are flattened
(c) etc… .
Unless the student is as industrious and as ingenious as the multiple-choice programmer, it will
probably not have occurred to him that molecules may be flattened as a gas is compressed. If he
chooses item (b) and is corrected by the machine, we may say that he ‘has learned that it is
wrong,’ but this does not mean that the sentence will never occur to him again. And if he is
unlucky enough to select the right answer first, his reading of the plausible but erroneous answer
will be corrected only ‘by implication’—an equally vague and presumably less effective process.
In either case, he may later find himself recalling that ‘somewhere he has read that molecules are
flattened when a gas is compressed.’ And, of course, somewhere he has” (50).
3
Material designed to teach geography was demonstrated with the machine shown in Figure 4
at the meeting of the American Psychological Association mentioned in the legend.
4
The material has been published (19).

4

THE TECHNOLOGY OF TEACHING
More than sixty years ago, in his Talks to Teachers on Psychology (23),
William James said:
You make a great, a very great mistake, if you think that psychology,
being the science of the mind’s laws, is something from which you can
deduce definite programs and schemes and methods of instruction for
immediate schoolroom use. Psychology is a science, and teaching is an
art; and sciences never generate arts directly out of themselves. An
intermediary inventive mind must make the application, by using its
originality.
In the years which followed, educational psychology and the
experimental psychology of learning did little to prove him wrong. As
late as 1962, an American critic, Jacques Barzun (2), asserted that
James’s book still contained “nearly all that anyone need know of
educational method.”
Speaking for the psychology of his time James was probably right,
but Barzun was clearly wrong. A special branch of psychology, the socalled experimental analysis of behavior, has produced if not an art at
least a technology of teaching from which one can indeed “deduce
programs and schemes and methods of instruction.” The public is
aware of this technology through two of its products, teaching
machines and programmed instruction. Their rise has been meteoric.
Within a single decade hundreds of instructional programs have been
published, many different kinds of teaching machines have been
offered for sale, and societies for programmed instruction have been
founded in a dozen countries. Unfortunately, much of the technology
has lost contact with its basic science.
Teaching machines are widely misunderstood. It is often supposed
that they are simply devices which mechanize functions once served by
human teachers. Testing is an example. The teacher must discover what
the student has learned and can do so with the help of machines; the
scoring of multiple-choice tests by machine is now common. Nearly 40
years ago Sidney Pressey (35) pointed out that a student learned
something when told whether his answers are right or wrong and that a
self-scoring machine could therefore teach. Pressey assumed that the
student had studied a subject before coming to the testing machine, but

some modern versions also present the material on which the student is
to be tested. They thus imitate, and could presumably replace, the
teacher. But holding a student responsible for assigned material is not
teaching, even though it is a large part of modern school and university
practice. It is simply a way of inducing the student to learn without
being taught.
Machines also have the energy and patience needed for simple
exercise or drill. Many language laboratories take the student over the
same material again and again, as only a dedicated private tutor could
do, on some theory of “automaticity.” These are all functions which
should never have been served by teachers in the first place, and
mechanizing them is small gain.
The programming of instruction has also been widely
misunderstood. The first programs emerging from an experimental
analysis of behavior were copied only in certain superficial aspects.
Educational theorists could assimilate the principles they appeared to
exemplify to earlier philosophies. Programmed instruction, for
example, has been called Socratic. The archetypal pattern is the famous
scene in the Meno in which Socrates takes the slave boy through
Pythagoras’s theorem on doubling the square. It is one of the great
frauds in the history of education. Socrates asks the boy a long series of
leading questions and, although the boy makes no response which has
not been carefully prepared, insists that he has told him nothing. In any
case the boy has learned nothing; he could not have gone through the
proof by himself afterwards, and Socrates says as much later in the
dialogue. Even if the boy had contributed something to the proof by
way of a modest original discovery, it would still be wrong to argue
that his behavior in doing so under Socrates’s careful guidance
1
resembled Pythagoras’s original unguided achievement.
Other supposed principles of programming have been found in the
writings of Comenius in the seventeenth century—for example, that the
student should not be asked to take a step he cannot take—and in the
work of E. L. Thorndike, who more than fifty years ago pointed to the
value of making sure that the student understood one page of a text
before moving on to the next. A good program does lead the student
step by step, each step is within his range, and he usually understands it
before moving on; but programming is much more than this. What it is,
and how it is related to teaching machines, can be made clear only by
returning to the experimental analysis of behavior which gave rise to

the movement.

OPERANT CONDITIONING
An important process in human behavior is attributed, none too
accurately, to “reward and punishment.” Thorndike described it in his
Law of Effect. It is now commonly referred to as “operant
conditioning”—not to be confused with the conditioned reflexes of
Pavlov. The essentials may be seen in a typical experimental
arrangement. Figure 7 shows a hungry rat in an experimental space
which contains a food dispenser. A horizontal bar at the end of a lever
projects from one wall. Depression of the lever operates a switch.
When the switch is connected with the food dispenser, any behavior on
the part of the rat which depresses the lever is, as we say, “reinforced
with food.” The apparatus simply makes the appearance of food
contingent upon the occurrence of an arbitrary bit of behavior. Under
such circumstances the probability that a response to the lever will
occur again is increased (44).
The basic contingency between an act and its consequences has been
studied over a fairly wide range of species. For example, pigeons have
been reinforced for pecking at transilluminated disks (Figure 8),
monkeys for operating toggle switches which were first designed for
that more advanced primate, man. Reinforcers which have been studied
include water, sexual contact, the opportunity to act aggressively, and
—with human subjects—approval of one’s fellow men and the
universal generalized reinforcer, money.
The relation between a response and its consequences may be
simple, and the change in probability of the response is not surprising.
It may therefore appear that research of this sort is simply proving the
obvious. A critic has recently said that King Solomon must have
known all about operant conditioning because he used rewards and
punishment. In the same sense his archers must have known all about
Hooke’s Law because they used bows and arrows. What is
technologically useful in operant conditioning is our increasing
knowledge of the extraordinarily subtle and complex properties of
behavior which may be traced to subtle and complex features of the
contingencies of reinforcement which prevail in the environment.

FIGURE 7. Rat pressing a horizontal bar attached to a lever projecting through the
wall. The circular aperture below and to the right of the bar contains a food dispenser.

FIGURE 8. Pigeon pecking a translucent disk. The square aperture below contains a
food dispenser.

We may arrange matters, for example, so that the rat will receive
food only when it depresses the lever with a given force. Weaker
responses then disappear, and exceptionally forceful responses begin to
occur and can be selected through further differential reinforcement.
Reinforcement may also be made contingent upon the presence of
stimuli: depression of the lever operates the food dispenser, for
example, only when a tone of a given pitch is sounding. As a result the
rat is much more likely to respond when a tone of that pitch is
sounding. Responses may also be reinforced only intermittently. Some
common schedules of reinforcement are the subject of probability
theory. Gambling devices often provide for the reinforcement of

varying numbers of responses in an unpredictable sequence.
Comparable schedules are programmed in the laboratory by interposing
counters between the operandum and the reinforcing device. The
extensive literature on schedules of reinforcement also covers
intermittent reinforcement arranged by clocks and speedometers (16).
A more complex experimental space contains two operanda—two
levers to be pressed, for example, or two disks to be pecked. Some of
the resulting contingencies are the subject of decision-making theory.
Responses may also be chained together, so that responding in one way
produces the opportunity to respond in another. A still more complex
experimental space contains two organisms with their respective
operanda and with interlocking schedules of reinforcement. Game
theory is concerned with contingencies of this sort. The study of
operant behavior, however, goes beyond an analysis of possible
contingencies to the behavior generated.
The application of operant conditioning to education is simple and
direct. Teaching is the arrangement of contingencies of reinforcement
under which students learn. They learn without teaching in their natural
environments, but teachers arrange special contingencies which
expedite learning, hastening the appearance of behavior which would
otherwise be acquired slowly or making sure of the appearance of
behavior which might otherwise never occur.
A teaching machine is simply any device which arranges
contingencies of reinforcement. There are as many different kinds of
machines as there are different kinds of contingencies. In this sense the
apparatuses developed for the experimental analysis of behavior were
the first teaching machines. They remain much more complex and
subtle than the devices currently available in education—a state of
affairs to be regretted by anyone who is concerned with making
education as effective as possible. Both the basic analysis and its
technological applications require instrumental aid. Early
experimenters manipulated stimuli and reinforcers and recorded
responses by hand, but current research without the help of extensive
apparatus is unthinkable. The teacher needs similar instrumental
support, for it is impossible to arrange many of the contingencies of
reinforcement which expedite learning without it. Adequate apparatus
has not eliminated the researcher, and teaching machines will not
eliminate the teacher. But both teacher and researcher must have such
equipment if they are to work effectively.
Programmed instruction also made its first appearance in the

laboratory in the form of programmed contingencies of reinforcement.
The almost miraculous power to change behavior which frequently
emerges is perhaps the most conspicuous contribution to date of an
experimental analysis of behavior. There are at least four different
kinds of programming. One is concerned with generating new and
complex patterns or “topographies” of behavior. It is in the nature of
operant conditioning that a response cannot be reinforced until it has
occurred. For experimental purposes a response is chosen which
presents no problem (a rat is likely to press a sensitive lever within a
short time), but we could easily specify responses which never occur in
this way. Can they then never be reinforced?
A classroom demonstration of the programming of a rare topography
of response was mentioned on page 10. A hungry pigeon is placed in
an enclosed space where it is visible to the class. A food dispenser can
be operated with a handswitch held by the demonstrator. The pigeon
has learned to eat from the food dispenser without being disturbed by
its operation, but it has not been conditioned in any other way. The
class is asked to specify a response which is not part of the current
repertoire of the pigeon. Suppose, for example, it is decided that the
pigeon is to pace a figure eight. The demonstrator cannot simply wait
for this response to occur and then reinforce it. Instead he reinforces
any current response which may contribute to the final pattern—
possibly simply turning the head or taking a step in, say, a clockwise
direction. The reinforced response will quickly be repeated (one can
actually see learning take place under these circumstances), and
reinforcement is then withheld until a more marked movement in the
same direction is made. Eventually only a complete turn is reinforced.
Similar responses in a counterclockwise direction are then
strengthened, the clockwise movement suffering partial extinction.
When a complete counterclockwise movement has thus been shaped,
the clockwise turn is reinstated, and eventually the pigeon makes both
turns in succession and is reinforced. The whole pattern is then quickly
repeated, QED. The process of shaping a response of this complexity
should take no more than five or ten minutes. The demonstrator’s only
contact with the pigeon is by way of the handswitch, which permits
him to determine the exact moment of operation of the food dispenser.
By selecting responses to be reinforced he improvises a program of
contingencies, at each stage of which a response is reinforced which
makes it possible to move on to a more demanding stage. The
contingencies gradually approach those which generate the final

specified response.
This method of shaping a topography of response has been used by
Wolf, Mees, and Risley (65) to solve a difficult behavior problem. A
boy was born blind with cataracts. Before he was of an age at which an
operation was feasible, he had begun to display severe temper
tantrums, and after the operation he remained unmanageable. It was
impossible to get him to wear the glasses without which he would soon
become permanently blind. His tantrums included serious selfdestructive behavior, and he was admitted to a hospital with a diagnosis
of “child schizophrenia.” Two principles of operant conditioning were
applied. The temper tantrums were extinguished by making sure that
they were never followed by reinforcing consequences. A program of
contingencies of reinforcement was then designed to shape the desired
behavior of wearing glasses. It was necessary to allow the child to go
hungry so that food could be used as an effective reinforcer. Empty
glasses frames were placed about the room and any response which
made contact with them was reinforced with food. Reinforcement was
then made contingent on such activities as picking up the frames and
carrying them about, in a programmed sequence. Some difficulty was
encountered in shaping the response of putting the frames on the face
in the proper position. When this was eventually achieved, the
prescription lenses were put in the frames. A cumulative curve (Figure
9) shows the number of hours per day the glasses were worn, the final
slope of which represents essentially all the child’s waking hours.
Operant techniques were first applied to psychotic subjects in the
pioneering work of Lindsley (26). Ayllon and Azrin and others have
programmed contingencies of reinforcement to solve certain
management problems in institutions for the psychotic (1). The
techniques are not designed to cure psychoses but to generate troublefree behavior. In one experiment a whole ward was placed on an
economic basis. Patients were reinforced with tokens when they
behaved in ways which made for simpler management, and in turn they
paid for services received, such as meals or consultations with
psychiatrists. Such an economic system, like any economic system in
the world at large, represents a special set of terminal contingencies
which in neither system guarantees appropriate behavior. The
contingencies must be made effective by appropriate programs.

FIGURE 9. Curve showing the number of hours per day during which glasses were
worn, plotted cumulatively. The final slope is about 12 hours per day. (After Wolf,
Mees, and Risley.)

OTHER KINDS OF PROGRAMS
A second kind of programming is used to alter temporal or intensive
properties of behavior. By differentially reinforcing only the more
vigorous instances in which a pigeon pecks a disk and by advancing the
minimum requirement very slowly, a pigeon can be induced to peck so
energetically that the base of its beak becomes inflamed. If one were to
begin with this terminal contingency, the behavior would never
develop. There is nothing new about the necessary programming. An
athletic coach may train a high jumper simply by moving the bar higher
by small increments, each setting permitting some successful jumps to
occur. But many intensive and temporal contingencies—such as those
seen in the arts, crafts, and music—are very subtle and must be
carefully analyzed if they are to be properly programmed.
Behavior is often effective only if properly timed. Individual

differences in timing, ranging from the most awkward to the most
skillful performances, affect choices of career and of artistic interests
and participation in sports and crafts. Presumably a “sense of rhythm”
is worth teaching, yet practically nothing is now done to arrange the
necessary contingencies. The skilled typist, tennis player, lathe
operator, or musician is, of course, under the influence of reinforcing
mechanisms which generate subtle timing, but many people never
reach the point at which these natural contingencies can take over.
A relatively simple device supplies the necessary contingencies
(Figure 10). The student taps a rhythmic pattern in unison with the
device. “Unison” is specified very loosely at first (the student can be a
little early or late at each tap) but the specifications are slowly
sharpened. The process is repeated for various speeds and patterns. In
another arrangement, the student echoes rhythmic patterns sounded by
the machine, though not in unison, and again the specifications for an
accurate reproduction are progressively sharpened. Rhythmic patterns
can also be brought under the control of a printed score.
Another machine has been designed in which a child learns to “think
musically.” He has access to a small keyboard on which an even
smaller selection of keys may be indicated (Figure 11). In one
arrangement, the device sounds a tone, and the child must strike the
key producing a tone of the same pitch. Only the correct key may
produce a tone. In another setting, the machine may sound one of two
tones and indicate two keys. The child is to respond to the proper key.
At first the tones are quite different, but they approach each other as the
child learns to match pitch by pressing the proper key. The device can
teach intervals, melodies, and so on.

FIGURE 10. A machine to teach “a good sense of rhythm.” The child presses a button
in unison with a series of clicks, presented at different speeds and in different patterns.
Coincidences are reported by a flashing light. The machine can adjust the tolerance
which defines a coincidence.

FIGURE 11. A machine to teach “musical thinking.” The machine plays single notes,
intervals, melodies, and so on. Keys may be lighted to indicate a set from which
matching choices are to be made. Incorrect keys are silent. Correct matches may be
reinforced additionally through the operation of the dispenser on the top of the machine
which delivers tokens, candies, or coins.

Another kind of programming is concerned with bringing behavior
under the control of stimuli. We could determine a rat’s sensitivity to
tones of different pitches by reinforcing responses made when one tone
is sounding and extinguishing all responses made when other tones are
sounding. We may wish to avoid extinction, however; the organism is
to acquire the discrimination without making any “errors.” An effective
procedure has been analyzed by Terrace (58, 59). Suppose we are to
condition a pigeon to peck a red disk but not a green. If we simply
reinforce it for pecking the red disk, it will almost certainly peck the
green as well and these errors must be extinguished. Terrace begins
with disks which are as different as possible. One is illuminated by a
red light, but the other is dark. Although reinforced for pecking the red
disk, the pigeon is not likely to peck the dark disk, at least during a
period of a few seconds. When the disk again becomes red, a response
is immediately made. It is possible to extend the length of time the disk

remains dark. Eventually the pigeon pecks the red disk instantly, but
does not peck the dark disk no matter how long it remains dark. The
important point is that it has never pecked the dark disk at any time. A
faint green light is then added to the dark disk. Over a period of time
the green light becomes brighter and eventually is as bright as the red.
The pigeon now responds instantly to the red disk but not to the green
and has never responded to the green.
A second and more difficult discrimination can then be taught
without errors by transferring control from the red and green disks. Let
us say that the pigeon is to respond to a white vertical bar projected on
a black disk but not to a horizontal. These patterns are first
superimposed upon red and green backgrounds, and the pigeon is
reinforced when it responds to red-vertical but not to green-horizontal.
The intensity of the color is then slowly reduced. Eventually the pigeon
responds to the black and white vertical bar, does not respond to the
black and white horizontal bar, and has never done so. The result could
perhaps be achieved more rapidly by permitting errors to occur and
extinguishing them, but other issues may need to be taken into account.
When extinction is used, the pigeon shows powerful emotional
responses to the wrong stimulus; when the Terrace technique is used it
remains quite indifferent. It is, so to speak, “not afraid of making a
mistake.” The difference is relevant to education, where the anxiety
generated by current methods constitutes a serious problem. There are
those who would defend a certain amount of anxiety as a good thing,
but we may still envy the occasionally happy man who readily
responds when the occasion is appropriate but is otherwise both
emotionally and intellectually disengaged. The important point is that
the terminal contingencies controlling the behavior of both anxious and
nonanxious students are the same; the difference is to be traced to the
program by way of which the terminal behavior has been reached.
The discriminative capacities of lower organisms have been
investigated with methods which require very skillful programming.
Blough (6), for example, has developed a technique in which a pigeon
maintains a spot of light at an intensity at which it can just be seen. By
using a range of monochromatic lights he has shown that the spectral
sensitivity of the pigeon is very close to that of man. Several other
techniques are available which make it possible to use lower organisms
as sensitive psychophysical observers. They are available, however,
only to those who understand the principles of programming.
A “discriminating” person can tell the difference between colors,

shapes, and sizes of objects; he can identify three-dimensional forms
seen from different aspects; he can find patterns concealed in other
patterns; he can identify pitches, intervals, and musical themes and
distinguish between various tempos and rhythms—all of this in an
almost infinite variety. Discriminations of this sort are essential in
science and industry and in everyday life as in identifying the school of
a painter or the period of a composer. The remarkable fact is that the
necessary contingencies of reinforcement are quite rare in the
environment of the average child. Even children who are encouraged to
play with objects of different sizes, shapes, and colors and given a
passing acquaintance with musical patterns are seldom exposed to the
precise contingencies needed to build subtle discriminations. It is not
surprising that most of them move into adulthood with largely
undeveloped “abilities.” Relatively simple machines should remedy the
defect. The machine shown in Figure 12 teaches the child to
discriminate properties of stimuli while “matching to sample.” Pictures
or words are projected under translucent windows, which respond to
the touch by closing circuits. A child can be made to “look at the
sample” by requiring him to press the sample window at the top. He is
reinforced for this response by the appearance of material in the lower
windows from which a choice is to be made. He identifies
corresponding material by pressing one of the lower windows and is
reinforced again—possibly simply by the appearance of new material.
If he presses a wrong window, the choices disappear until he presses
the top window again—in the course of which he again looks at the
sample. Many other arrangements of responses and reinforcements are,
of course, possible. In an improved version of this machine (Figure 13)
auditory stimuli can be generated by pressing sample and choice
buttons. If devices of this sort were generally available in nursery
schools and kindergartens, children would be far more skillful in
dealing with their environments. All young children are now
“disadvantaged” in this respect.

FIGURE 12. Early model of a machine to teach matching to sample or learning
conventional correspondences among patterns. The sample appears in the top window,
the choices below. Pressing the window over the correct choice causes the machine to
move new material into place.

Some current work by Sidman and Stoddard provides a dramatic
example of programming a subtle discrimination in a microcephalic
idiot. At the start of the experiment their subject (Figure 14) was 40
years old. He was said to have a mental age of about 18 months. He
was partially toilet trained and dressed himself with help. To judge
from the brain of his sister, now available for postmortem study, his
brain is probably about one-third the normal size. Sidman and Stoddard
investigated his ability to discriminate circular forms projected on
translucent vertical panels (42). Small pieces of chocolate were used as
reinforcers. At first any pressure against a single large vertical panel
(Figure 15A) operated the device which dropped a bit of chocolate into
a cup within reach. Though showing relatively poor motor
coordination, the subject eventually executed the required, rather

delicate response. The panel was then subdivided into a three-by-three
set of smaller panels (not easily seen in Figure 14, but represented
schematically in Figure 15B), the central panel not being used in what
follows. The subject was first reinforced when he pressed any of the
eight remaining panels. A single panel was then lit at random, a circle
being projected on it (Figure 15C). The subject learned to press the
lighted panel. Flat ellipses were then projected on the other panels at a
low illumination (Figure 15D). In subsequent settings the ellipses, now
brightly illuminated, progressively approached circles (Figure 15E to
G). Each stage was maintained until the subject had formed the
necessary discrimination, all correct responses being reinforced with
chocolate. Eventually the subject could successfully select a circle from
an array approximately like that shown in Figure 15H. Using similar
shaping techniques Sidman and his associates have conditioned the
subject to pick up and use a pencil appropriately, tracing letters faintly
projected on a sheet of paper.

FIGURE 13. A more recent model of a machine to teach matching or related patterns.
The machine presents auditory patterns as well as visual. Correct responses move new
material into place. The machine can be used to teach both auditory and visual aspects
of verbal behavior, music, and so on. It also teaches in the manner of the machines
shown in Figures 4 and 5, a strip of paper being exposed at the right.

FIGURE 14. Microcephalic idiot, 40 years old, operating a complex apparatus used to
teach form discrimination. (After Sidman and Stoddard.)

FIGURE 15. A program designed to teach form discrimination. Reinforcement was
contingent on: (A) a response moving a large panel; (B) a response moving any one of
nine smaller panels (with the exception of the center panel); (C) a response moving
only the one panel on which a circle is projected; (D) as before except that flat ellipses
appear faintly on the other panels; (E, F, G) a response to the panel bearing a circle,

appearing in random position among ellipses the shorter axes of which are
progressively lengthening; (H) a response to the panel bearing a circle among ellipses
closely approximating circles.

The intellectual accomplishments of this microcephalic idiot in the
forty-first year of his life have exceeded all those of his first 40 years.
They were possible only because he has lived a few hours of each week
of that year in a well programmed environment. No very bright future
beckons (he has already lived longer than most people of his kind), and
it is impossible to say what he might have achieved if he had been
subject to a similar program from birth, but he has contributed to our
knowledge by demonstrating the power of a method of instruction
which could scarcely be tested on a less promising case. (The bright
futures belong to the normal and exceptional children who will be
fortunate enough to live in environments which have been designed to
maximize their development, and of whose potential achievements we
have now scarcely any conception.)
A fourth kind of programming has to do with maintaining behavior
under infrequent reinforcement. A pigeon will continue to respond
even though only one response in every hundred, say, is reinforced, but
it will not do so unless the contingencies have been programmed. A
fresh pigeon is no more likely to peck a disk a hundred times than to
pace a figure eight. The behavior is built up by reinforcing every
response, then every other response, then every fifth response, and so
on, waiting at each stage until the behavior is reasonably stable. Under
careful programming pigeons have continued to respond when only
every ten-thousandth response has been reinforced, and this is certainly
not the limit. An observer might say, for example, that the pigeon is
“greatly interested in his work,” “industrious,” “remarkably tolerant to
frustration,” “free from discouragement,” or “dedicated to his task.”
These expressions are commonly applied to students who have had the
benefit of similar programming, accidental or arranged.
The effective scheduling of reinforcement is an important element in
educational design. Suppose we wish to teach a student to read “good
books”—books which, almost by definition, do not reinforce the reader
sentence by sentence or even paragraph by paragraph but only when
possibly hundreds of pages have prepared him for a convincing or
moving dénouement. The student must be exposed to a program of
materials which build up a tendency to read in the absence of
reinforcement. Such programs are seldom constructed deliberately and
seldom arise by accident, and it is therefore not surprising that few

students even in good universities learn to read books of this sort and
continue to do so for the rest of their lives. In their pride, schools are
likely to arrange just the wrong conditions; they are likely to maintain
so-called standards under which books are forced upon students before
they have had adequate preparation.
Other objectives in education need similar programming. The
dedicated scientist who works for years in spite of repeated failures is
often looked upon as a happy accident, but he may well be the product
of a happy if accidental history of reinforcement. A program in which
exciting results were first common but became less and less frequent
could generate the capacity to continue in the absence of reinforcement
for long periods of time. Such programs should arise naturally as
scientists turn to more and more difficult areas. Perhaps not many
effective programs are to be expected for this reason, and they are only
rarely designed by teachers of science. This may explain why there are
so few dedicated scientists. Maintaining a high level of activity is one
of the more important achievements of programming. Repeatedly, in its
long history, education has resorted to aversive control to keep its
students at work. A proper understanding of the scheduling of
reinforcement may lead at long last to a better solution of this problem
(see Chapter 7).

A FEW EXAMPLES
Let us look at these principles of programming at work in one or two
traditional educational assignments. Instruction in handwriting will
serve as one example. To say that a child is to learn “how to write” tells
us very little. The so-called signs of “knowing how to write” provide a
more useful set of behavioral specifications. The child is to form letters
and words which are legible and graceful according to taste. He is to do
this first in copying a model, then in writing to dictation (or selfdictation as he spells out words he would otherwise speak), and
eventually in writing as a separate nonvocal form of verbal behavior. A
common method is to ask the child to copy letters or words and to
approve or otherwise reinforce his approximations to good copy. More
and more exact copies are demanded as the hand improves—in a crude
sort of programming. The method is ineffective largely because the
reinforcements are too long deferred. The parent or teacher comments
upon or corrects the child’s work long after it has been performed.

A possible solution is to teach the child to discriminate between
good and bad form before he starts to write. Acceptable behavior
should then generate immediate, automatic self-reinforcement. This is
seldom done. Another possibility is to make reinforcement immediately
contingent upon successful responses. One method now being tested is
to treat paper chemically so that the pen the child uses writes in dark
gray when a response is correct and yellow when it is incorrect. The
dark gray line is made automatically reinforcing through generous
commendation. Under such contingencies the proper execution of a
letter can be programmed; at first the child makes a very small
contribution in completing a letter, but through progressive stages he
approaches the point at which he composes the letter as a whole, the
chemical response of the paper differentially reinforcing good form
throughout. The model to be copied is then made progressively less
important by separating it in both time and space from the child’s work.
Eventually words are written to dictation, letter by letter, in spelling
dictated words, and in describing pictures. The same kind of
differential reinforcement can be used to teach such things as good
form and proper spacing. The child is eventually forming letters
skillfully under continuous automatic reinforcement. The method is
directed as much toward motivation as toward good form. Even quite
young children remain busily at work for long periods of time without
coercion or threat, showing few signs of fatigue, nervousness, or other
forms of escape.
As a second example we may consider the acquisition of a simple
form of verbal behavior. A behavioral specification is here likely to be
especially strongly resisted. It is much more in line with traditional
educational policy to say that the student is to “know facts, understand
principles, be able to put ideas into words, express meanings, or
communicate information.” The behavior exhibited in such activities
can be formulated without reference to ideas, meanings, or information,
and many of the principles currently used in programming verbal
knowledge have been drawn from such a formulation (47). The field is
too large to be adequately covered here, but two examples may suggest
the direction of the approach.
What happens when a student memorizes a poem? Let us say that he
begins by reading the poem from a text. His behavior is at that time
under the control of the text, and it is to be accounted for by examining
the process through which he has learned to read. When he eventually
speaks the poem in the absence of a text, the same form of verbal

behavior has come under the control of other stimuli. He may begin to
recite when asked to do so—he is then under control of an external
verbal stimulus—but, as he continues to recite, his behavior comes
under the control of stimuli he himself is generating (not necessarily in
a crude word-by-word chaining of responses). In the process of
“memorizing” the poem, control passes from one kind of stimulus to
another.
A method of transferring control from text to self-generated stimuli
makes a convincing classroom demonstration. A short poem is
projected on a screen or written on a chalkboard. A few unnecessary
letters are omitted. The class reads the poem in chorus. A second slide
is then projected in which other letters are missing (or letters erased
from the chalkboard). The class could not have read the poem correctly
if this form had been presented first, but because of its recent history it
is able to do so. (Some members undoubtedly receive help from others
in the process of choral reading.) In a third setting still other letters are
omitted, and after a series of five or six settings the text has completely
disappeared. The class is nevertheless able to “read” the poem. Control
has passed mainly to self-generated stimuli.
As another example, consider what a student learns when he consults
an illustrated dictionary. After looking at a labeled picture, we say that
he knows something he did not know before. This is another of those
vague expressions which have done so much harm to education. The
“signs or symptoms of such knowledge” are of two sorts. Shown the
accompanying picture without the text the student can say “caduceus”
(we say that he now knows what the pictured object is called) or,
shown the word caduceus, he can now describe or reconstruct the
picture (we say that he now knows what the word caduceus means).
But what has actually happened?

caduceus

The basic process is similar to that of transferring discriminative
control in the Terrace experiment. To begin with, the student can
respond to the picture in various ways: he can describe it without
naming it; he can find a similar picture in an array; he can draw a fair
copy. He can also speak the name by reading the printed word. When
he first looks at the picture and reads the word, his verbal response is
primarily under the control of the text, but it must eventually be
controlled by the picture. As in transferring the control exerted by red
and green to vertical and horizontal lines, we can change the control
efficiently by making the text gradually less important, covering part of
it, removing some of the letters, or fogging it with a translucent mask.
As the picture acquires control the student can speak the name with less
and less help from the text. Eventually, when the picture exerts enough
control, he “knows the name of the pictured object.” The normal
student can learn the name of one object so quickly that the vanishing
technique may not be needed, but it is a highly effective procedure in
learning the names of a large number of objects. (The good student
learns how, by himself, to make progressive reductions in the
effectiveness of a text: he may glance at the text out of the corner of his
eye, uncover it bit by bit, and so on. In this way he improvises his own
program in making the text less and less important as the picture
acquires control of the verbal response.)

In teaching the student “the meaning of the word caduceus” we
could slowly obscure the picture, asking the student to respond to the
name by completing a drawing or description or by finding a matching
picture in an array. Eventually in answer to the question: What is a
caduceus? he would describe the object, make a crude sketch, or point
to the picture of a caduceus. The skillful student uses techniques of this
sort in studying unprogrammed material.
“Knowing what a caduceus is” or “knowing the meaning of the word
caduceus” is probably more than responding in these ways to picture or
text. There are other “signs of knowledge,” and that is one reason why
the concept of knowledge is so inadequate. But other relevant behavior
must be taught, if at all, in substantially the same way.

SOME COMMON OBJECTIONS
These examples do scant justice to the many hundreds of effective
programs now available or to the techniques which many of them use
so effectively, but they must suffice as a basis for discussing a few
general issues. An effective technology of teaching, derived not from
philosophical principles but from a realistic analysis of human
behavior, has much to contribute, but as its nature has come to be
clearly seen, strong opposition has arisen.
A common objection is that most of the early work responsible for
the basic formulation of behavior was done on so-called lower animals.
It has been argued that the procedures are therefore appropriate only to
animals and that to use them in education is to treat the student like an
animal. So far as I know, no one argues that because something is true
of a pigeon, it is therefore true of a man. There are enormous
differences in the topographies of the behaviors of man and pigeon and
in the kinds of environmental events which are relevant to that behavior
—differences which, if anatomy and physiology were adequate to the
task, we could probably compare with differences in the mediating
substrata—but the basic processes in behavior, as in neural tissue, show
helpful similarities. Relatively simple organisms have many advantages
in early stages of research, but they impose no limit on that research.
Complex processes are met and dealt with as the analysis proceeds.
Experiments on pigeons may not throw much light on the “nature” of
man, but they are extraordinarily helpful in enabling us to analyze
man’s environment more effectively. What is common to pigeon and

man is a world in which certain contingencies of reinforcement prevail.
The schedule of reinforcement which makes a pigeon a pathological
gambler is to be found at racetrack and roulette table, where it has a
comparable effect.
Another objection is to the use of contrived contingencies of
reinforcement. In daily life one does not wear glasses in order to get
food or point to circles in order to receive chocolate. Such reinforcers
are not naturally contingent on the behavior and there may seem to be
something synthetic, spurious, or even fraudulent about them. The
attack on contrived contingencies of reinforcement may be traced to
Rousseau and his amazing book, Emile (39). Rousseau wanted to avoid
the punitive systems of his day. Convinced as he was that civilization
corrupts, he was also afraid of all social reinforcers. His plan was to
make the student dependent upon things rather than people. John
Dewey restated the principle by emphasizing real life experiences in
the schoolroom. In American education it is commonly argued that a
child must be taught nothing until he can reap natural benefits from
knowing it. He is not to learn to write until he can take satisfaction in
writing his name in his books or notes to his friends. Producing a gray
rather than a yellow line is irrelevant to handwriting. Unfortunately, the
teacher who confines himself to natural reinforcers is often ineffective,
particularly because only certain subjects can be taught through their
use, and he eventually falls back upon some form of punishment. But
aversive control is the most shameful of irrelevancies: it is only in
school that one parses a Latin sentence to avoid the cane.
The objection to contrived reinforcers arises from a
misunderstanding of the nature of teaching. The teacher expedites
learning by arranging special contingencies of reinforcement, which
may not resemble the contingencies under which the behavior is
eventually useful. Parents teach a baby to talk by reinforcing its first
efforts with approval and affection, but these are not natural
consequences of speech. The baby learns to say “mama,” “dada,”
“spoon,” or “cup” months before he ever calls to his father or mother or
identifies them to a passing stranger or asks for a spoon or cup or
reports their presence to someone who cannot see them. The contrived
reinforcement shapes the topography of verbal behavior long before
that behavior can produce its normal consequences in a verbal
community. In the same way a child reinforced for the proper
formation of letters by a chemical reaction is prepared to write long
before the natural consequences of effective writing take over. It was

necessary to use a “spurious” reinforcer to get the boy to wear glasses,
but once the behavior had been shaped and maintained for a period of
time, the natural reinforcers which follow from improved vision could
take over. The real issue is whether the teacher prepares the student for
the natural reinforcers which are to replace the contrived reinforcers
used in teaching. The behavior which is expedited in the teaching
process would be useless if it were not to be effective in the world at
large in the absence of instructional contingencies.
Another objection to effective programmed instruction is that it does
not teach certain important activities. When required to learn
unprogrammed material for an impending examination the student
learns how to study, how to clear up puzzling matters, how to work
under puzzlement, and so on. These may be as important as the subject
matter itself. The same argument could have been raised with respect to
a modern experimental analysis of learning when contrasted with early
studies of that process. Almost all early investigators of learning
constructed what we now call terminal contingencies of reinforcement
to which an organism was immediately subjected. Thus, a rat was put
into a maze or a cat into a puzzle box. The organism possessed little if
any behavior appropriate to such a “problem,” but some responses were
reinforced, and over a period of time an acceptable terminal
performance might be reached through “trial and error.” A program of
contingencies of reinforcement would have brought the organism to the
same terminal performance much more rapidly and efficiently, but in
doing so it could have been said to deprive the organism of the
opportunity to learn how to try, how to explore—indeed, how to solve
problems.
The educator who assigns material to be studied for an impending
test presents the student with an opportunity to learn to examine the
material in a special way which facilitates recall, to work industriously
at something which is not currently reinforcing, and so on. It is true that
a program designed simply to impart knowledge of a subject matter
does not do any of this. It does not because it is not designed to do so.
Programming undertakes to reach one goal at a time. Efficient ways of
studying and thinking are separate goals. A crude parallel is offered by
the current argument in favor of the cane or related aversive practices
on the ground that they build character; they teach a boy to take
punishment and to accept responsibility for his conduct. These are
worthwhile goals, but they should not necessarily be taught at the same
time as, say, Latin grammar or mathematics. Rousseau suggested a

relevant form of programming through which a child could be taught to
submit to aversive stimuli without alarm or panic. He pointed out that a
baby dropped into a cold bath will probably be frightened and cry, but
that if one begins with water at body temperature and cools it one
degree per day, the baby will eventually not be disturbed by cold water.
The program must be carefully followed. (In his enthusiasm for the
new science, Rousseau exclaimed, “Use a thermometer!”) Similar
programs can teach a tolerance for painful stimuli, but caning a boy for
idleness, forgetfulness, or bad spelling is an unlikely example. It only
occasionally builds what the eighteenth century called “bottom,” as it
only occasionally eliminates idleness, forgetfulness, or bad spelling.
It is important to teach careful observation, exploration, and inquiry,
but they are not well taught by submitting a student to material which
he must observe and explore effectively or suffer the consequences.
Better methods are available. There are two ways to teach a man to
look before leaping: he may be severely punished when he leaps
without looking or he may be positively reinforced (possibly
“spuriously”) for looking before leaping. He may learn to look in both
cases, but when simply punished for leaping without looking he must
discover for himself the art of careful observation, and he is not likely
to profit from the experience of others. When he is reinforced for
looking, a suitable program will transmit earlier discoveries in the art
of observation. (Incidentally, the audio-visual devices mentioned
earlier which undertake to attract attention do not teach careful
observation. On the contrary, they are much more likely to deprive the
student of the opportunity to learn such skills than effective
programming of subject matters.)
Learning how to study is another example. When a teacher simply
tests students on assigned material, few ever learn to study well, and
many never learn at all. One may read for the momentary effect and
forget what one has read almost immediately; one obviously reads in a
very different way for retention. As we have seen, many of the
practices of the good student resemble those of the programmer. The
student can in a sense program material as he goes, rehearsing what he
has learned and glancing at a text only as needed. These practices can
be separately programmed as an important part of the student’s
education and can be much more effectively taught than by punishing
the student for reading without remembering.
It would be pleasant to be able to say that punishing the student for
not thinking is also not the only way to teach thinking. Some relevant

behaviors have been analyzed and can therefore be explicitly
programmed. Algorithmic methods of problem solving are examples.
Simply leading the student through a solution in the traditional way is
one kind of programming. Requiring him to solve a series of problems
of graded difficulty is another. More effective programs can certainly
be prepared. Unfortunately, they would only emphasize the rather
mechanical nature of algorithmic problem solving. Real thinking seems
to be something else. It is sometimes said to be a matter of “heuristics.”
But relevant practices can be formulated as techniques of solving the
problem of solving problems. Once a heuristic device or practice is
formulated and programmed, it cannot be distinguished in any
important way from algorithmic problem solving. The will-o’-the-wisp
2
of creative thinking still leads us on.
Human behavior often assumes novel forms, some of which are
valuable. The teaching of truly creative behavior is, nevertheless, a
contradiction in terms. Original discovery is seldom if ever guaranteed
in the classroom. In Polya’s little book, How to Solve It (33), a few
boys in a class eventually arrive at the formula for the diagonal of a
parallelopiped. It is possible that the teacher did not tell them the
formula, but it is unlikely that the course they followed under his
guidance resembled that of the original discoverer. Efforts to teach
creativity have sacrificed the teaching of subject matter. The teacher
steers a delicate course between two great fears—on the one hand that
he may not teach and on the other that he may tell the student
something. Until we know more about creative thinking, we may need
to confine ourselves to making sure that the student is in full possession
of the contributions of earlier thinkers, that he has been abundantly
reinforced for careful observation and inquiry, that he has the interest
and industry generated by a fortunate history of successes.
It has been said that an education is what survives when a man has
forgotten all he has been taught. Certainly few students could pass their
final examinations even a year or two after leaving school or college.
What has been learned of permanent value must therefore not be the
facts and principles covered by examinations but certain other kinds of
behavior often ascribed to special abilities. Far from neglecting these
kinds of behavior, careful programming reveals the need to teach them
as explicit educational objectives. For example, two programs prepared
with the help of the Committee on Programmed Instruction at Harvard
—a program in crystallography constructed by Chalmers, Holland,

Williamson, and Jackson (8) and in neuroanatomy by Murray and
Richard Sidman (43)—both reveal the importance of special skills in
three-dimensional thinking. As measured by available tests, these skills
vary enormously even among scientists who presumably make special
use of them. They can be taught with separate programs or as part of
crystallography or neuroanatomy when specifically recognized as
relevant skills. It is possible that education will eventually concentrate
on those forms of behavior which “survive when all one has learned
has been forgotten.”
The argument that effective teaching is inimical to thinking, whether
creative or not, raises a final point. We fear effective teaching, as we
fear all effective means of changing human behavior. Power not only
corrupts, it frightens; and absolute power frightens absolutely. We take
another—and very long—look at educational policy when we conceive
of teaching which really works. It has been said that teaching machines
and programmed instruction will mean regimentation (it is sometimes
added that regimentation is the goal of those who propose such
methods), but in principle nothing could be more regimented than
education as it now stands. School and state authorities draw up
syllabuses specifying what students are to learn year by year.
Universities insist upon “requirements” which are presumably to be
met by all students applying for admission. Examinations are
“standard.” Certificates, diplomas, and honors testify to the completion
of specified work. We do not worry about all this because we know
that students never learn what they are required to learn, but some other
safeguard must be found when education is effective.
It could well be that a technology of teaching will be unwisely used.
It could destroy initiative and creativity; it could make men all alike
(and not necessarily in being equally excellent); it could suppress the
beneficial effect of accidents on the development of the individual and
on the evolution of a culture. On the other hand, it could maximize the
genetic endowment of each student; it could make him as skillful,
competent, and informed as possible; it could build the greatest
diversity of interests; it could lead him to make the greatest possible
contribution to the survival and development of his culture. Which of
these futures lies before us will not be determined by the mere
availability of effective instruction. The use to which a technology of
teaching is to be put will depend upon other matters. We cannot avoid
the decisions which now face us by putting a stop to the scientific study
of human behavior or by refusing to make use of the technology which

inevitably flows from such a science.
The experimental analysis of behavior is a vigorous young science
which will inevitably find practical applications. Important extensions
have already been made in such fields as psychopharmacology and
psychotherapy. Its bearing on economics, government, law, and even
religion are beginning to attract attention. It is thus concerned with
government in the broadest possible sense. In the government of the
future the techniques we associate with education are most likely to
prevail. That is why it is so important that this young science has begun
by taking its most effective technological step in the development of a
technology of teaching.
1

Cohen has prepared a program of sixteen items which successfully taught the theorem to

twenty-seven out of thirty-three undergraduate students in psychology (11).
2
Many of the preceding points are developed in greater detail in Chapter 6.

5

WHY TEACHERS FAIL
The most widely publicized efforts to improve education show an
extraordinary neglect of method. Learning and teaching are not
analyzed, and almost no effort is made to improve teaching as such.
The aid which education is to receive usually means money, and the
proposals for spending it follow a few familiar lines. We should build
more and better schools. We should recruit more and better teachers.
We should search for better students and make sure that all competent
students can go to school or college. We should multiply teacherstudent contacts with films and television. We should design new
curricula. All this can be done without looking at teaching itself. We
need not ask how those better teachers are to teach those better students
in those better schools, what kinds of contact are to be multiplied
through mass media, or how new curricula are to be made effective.
Perhaps we should not expect questions of this sort to be asked in
what is essentially a consumer’s revolt. Earlier educational reforms
were proposed by teachers—a Comenius, a Rousseau, a John Dewey—
who were familiar with teaching methods, knew their shortcomings,
and thought they saw a chance to improve them. Today the disaffected
are the parents, employers, and others who are unhappy about the
products of education. When teachers complain, it is as consumers of
education at lower levels—graduate school authorities want better
college teaching and college teachers work to improve high-school
curricula. It is perhaps natural that consumers should turn to the
conspicuous shortcomings of plant, personnel, and equipment rather
that to method.
It is also true that educational method has not been brought to their
attention in a favorable light. Pedagogy is not a prestigious word. Its
low estate may be traced in part to the fact that under the blandishments
of statistical methods, which promised a new kind of rigor, educational
psychologists spent half a century measuring the results of teaching
while neglecting teaching itself. They compared different methods of
teaching in matched groups and could often say that one method was
clearly better than another, but the methods they compared were
usually not drawn from their own research or even their own theories,
and their results seldom generated new methods. Psychological studies
of learning were equally sterile—concentrating on relatively

unimportant details of a few typical learning situations such as the
memory drum, the maze, the discrimination box, and verbal
“problems.” The learning and forgetting curves which emerged from
these studies were never useful in the classroom and came to occupy a
less and less important place in textbooks on educational psychology.
Even today many distinguished learning theorists insist that their work
has no practical relevance.
For these and doubtless other reasons, what has been taught as
pedagogy has not been a true technology of teaching. College teaching,
indeed, has not been taught at all. The beginning teacher receives no
professional preparation. He usually begins to teach simply as he
himself has been taught, and if he improves, it is only in the light of his
own unaided experience. High-school and grade-school teaching is
taught primarily through apprenticeships, in which students receive the
advice and counsel of experienced teachers. Certain trade skills and
rules of thumb are passed along, but the young teacher’s own
experience is to be the major source of improvement. Even this modest
venture in teacher training is under attack. It is argued that a good
teacher is simply one who knows his subject matter and is interested in
it. Any special knowledge of pedagogy as a basic science of teaching is
felt to be unnecessary.
The attitude is regrettable. No enterprise can improve itself to the
fullest extent without examining its basic processes. A really effective
educational system cannot be set up until we understand the processes
of learning and teaching. Human behavior is far too complex to be left
to casual experience, or even to organized experience in the restricted
environment of the classroom. Teachers need help. In particular they
need the kind of help offered by a scientific analysis of behavior.
Fortunately such an analysis is now available. Principles derived
from it have already contributed to the design of schools, equipment,
texts, and classroom practices. Programmed instruction is perhaps its
best known achievement. Some acquaintance with its basic formulation
is beginning to be regarded as important in the training of teachers and
administrators. These positive contributions, however, are no more
important than the light which the analysis throws on current practices.
There is something wrong with teaching. From the point of view of an
experimental analysis of behavior, what is it?

AVERSIVE CONTROL

Corporal punishment has always played an important role in
education. As Marrou says,
… education and corporal punishment appeared as inseparable to a Hellenistic Greek as they had
to a Jewish or an Egyptian scribe in the time of the Pharoahs. Montaigne’s well-known description
of “punished children yelling and masters mad with rage” is as true of Latin as it is of Greek
schools. When the men of antiquity thought back to their schooldays they immediately
remembered the beatings. “To hold out the hand for the cane”—manum ferulae subducere—was
an elegant Latin way of saying “to study” (28).

The cane is still with us, and efforts to abolish it are vigorously
opposed. In Great Britain a split leather strap for whipping students
called a taws can be obtained from suppliers who advertise in
educational journals, one of whom is said to sell 3,000 annually. (The
taws has the advantage, shared by the rubber truncheon, of leaving no
incriminating marks.)
The brutality of corporal punishment and the viciousness it breeds in
both teacher and student have, of course, led to reform. Usually this has
meant little more than shifting to noncorporal measures, of which
education can boast an astonishing list. Ridicule (now largely
verbalized, but once symbolized by the dunce cap or by forcing the
student to sit facing a wall), scolding, sarcasm, criticism, incarceration
(“being kept after school”), extra school or home work, the withdrawal
of privileges, forced labor, ostracism, being put on silence, and fines—
these are some of the devices which have permitted the teacher to spare
the rod without spoiling the child. In some respects they are less
objectionable than corporal punishment, but the pattern remains: the
student spends a great part of his day doing things he does not want to
do. Education is in more than one sense “compulsory.” If a teacher is in
any doubt about his own methods, he should ask himself a few
questions. Do my students stop work immediately when I dismiss the
class? (If so, dismissal is obviously a release from a threat.) Do they
welcome rather than regret vacations and unscheduled days of no
school? Do I reward them for good behavior by excusing them from
other assignments? Do I punish them by giving them additional
assignments? Do I frequently say, “Pay attention,” “Now remember,”
or otherwise gently “admonish” them? Do I find it necessary from time
to time to “get tough” and threaten some form of punishment?
The teacher can use aversive control because he is either bigger and
stronger than his students or able to invoke the authority of parents or

police who are. He can, for example, coerce students into reading texts,
listening to lectures, taking part in discussions, recalling as much as
possible of what they have read or heard, and writing papers. This is
perhaps an achievement, but it is offset by an extraordinary list of
unwanted by-products traceable to the basic practice.
The student who works mainly to escape aversive stimulation
discovers other ways of escaping. He is tardy—“creeping like snail
unwillingly to school.” He stays away from school altogether.
Education has its own word for this—“truancy”—from an old Celtic
word meaning wretched. A special policeman, the truant officer, deals
with offenders by threatening still more aversive consequences. The
dropout is a legal truant. Children who commit suicide are often found
to have had trouble in school.
There are subtler forms of escape. Though physically present and
looking at teacher or text, the student does not pay attention. He is
hysterically deaf. His mind wanders. He daydreams. Incipient forms of
escape appear as restlessness. “Mental fatigue” is usually not a state of
exhaustion but an uncontrollable disposition to escape, and schools
deal with it by permitting escape to other activities which, it is hoped,
will also be profitable. The periods into which the school day is broken
measure the limits of successful aversive control rather than the
capacity for sustained attention. A child will spend hours absorbed in
play or in watching movies or television who cannot sit still in school
for more than a few minutes before escape becomes too strong to be
denied. One of the easiest forms of escape is simply to forget all one
has learned, and no one has discovered a form of control to prevent this
ultimate break for freedom.
An equally serious result which an experimental analysis of behavior
leads us to expect is that students counterattack. If the teacher is weak,
the student may attack openly. He may be impertinent, impudent, rude,
or defiant. His verbal behavior may be obscene or profane. He may
annoy the teacher and escape punishment by doing so surreptitiously—
by groaning, shuffling his feet, or snapping his fingers. A “tormentor”
is a surreptitious noisemaker especially designed for classroom use.
Physical attacks on teachers are now common. Verbal attacks in the
teacher’s absence are legendary.
Counterattack escalates. Slightly aversive action by the teacher
evokes reactions that demand severer measures, to which in turn the
student reacts still more violently. Escalation may continue until one
party withdraws (the student leaves school or the teacher resigns) or

dominates completely (the students establish anarchy or the teacher
imposes a despotic discipline).
Vandalism is another form of counterattack which is growing
steadily more serious. Many cities maintain special police forces to
guard school buildings on weekends. Schools are now being designed
so that windows cannot be easily broken from the street. A more
sweeping counterattack comes later when, as taxpayers or alumni,
former students refuse to support educational institutions. Antiintellectualism is often a general attack on all that education represents.
A much less obvious but equally serious effect of aversive control is
plain inaction. The student is sullen, stubborn, and unresponsive. He
“blocks.” He refuses to obey. Inaction is sometimes a form of escape
(rather than carry out an assignment, the student simply takes
punishment as the lesser evil) and sometimes a form of attack, the
object of which is to enrage the teacher, but it is also in its own right a
predictable effect of aversive control.
All these reactions have emotional accompaniments. Fear and
anxiety are characteristic of escape and avoidance, anger of
counterattack, and resentment of sullen inaction. These are the classical
features of juvenile deliquency, of psychosomatic illness, and of other
maladjustments familiar to the administrations and health services of
educational institutions. There are other serious disadvantages of
aversive control. Behavior which satisfies aversive contingencies may
have undesirable characteristics. It may be unduly compulsive
(“meticulous” once meant fearful); it requires effort; it is work. The
student plays a submissive role which is less and less useful as cultural
practices move away from totalitarian patterns. Rousseau could
complain further that scarcely more than half the pupils of his day lived
to enjoy the blessings for which the pleasures of their childhood were
sacrificed. Fortunately that is no longer true, but the sacrifice continues.
Aversive methods also have effects on teachers. The young teacher
may begin his career with a favorable attitude toward his profession
and toward his students, only to find himself playing a consistently
unfriendly role as a repertoire of aggressive behavior is repeatedly
reinforced. The prospect does not attract or hold good teachers. At
times the profession has been tolerable only to weaklings or to those
who enjoy treating others aversively. Even when moderately used,
aversive practices interfere with the kinds of relations with students
which make more productive techniques feasible.
In college and graduate schools the aversive pattern survives in the

now almost universal system of “assign and test.” The teacher does not
teach, he simply holds the student responsible for learning. The student
must read books, study texts, perform experiments, and attend lectures,
and he is responsible for doing so in the sense that, if he does not
correctly report what he has seen, heard, or read, he will suffer aversive
consequences. Questions and answers are so staple a feature of
education that their connection with teaching almost never occasions
surprise, yet as a demand for a response which will meet certain
specifications, a question is almost always slightly aversive. An
examination, as a collection of questions, characteristically generates
the anxiety and panic appropriate to avoidance and escape. Reading a
student’s paper is still likely to be called correcting it. Examinations are
designed to show principally what the student does not know. A test
which proves to be too easy is made harder before being given again,
ostensibly because an easy test does not discriminate, but more
probably because the teacher is afraid of weakening the threat under
which his students are working. A teacher is judged by his employers
and colleagues by the severity of the threat he imposes: he is a good
teacher if he makes his students work hard, regardless of how he does
so or of how much he teaches them by doing so. He eventually
evaluates himself in the same way; if he tries to shift to nonaversive
methods, he may discover that he resists making things easy as if this
necessarily meant teaching less.
Proposals to add requirements and raise standards are usually part of
an aversive pattern. A well-known educator (4) has written:
We must stiffen the work of our schools … we have every reason to concentrate on [certain
subjects] and be unflagging in our insistence that they be really learned… . Senior year [in high
school] ought to be the hardest… . [We should give] students work that is both difficult and
important, and [insist] that it be well done… . We should demand more of our students.

These expressions were probably intended to be synonymous with
“students should learn more” or possibly “teachers should teach more.”
There may be good reasons why students should take more
mathematics or learn a modern language more thoroughly or be better
prepared for college or graduate school, but they are not reasons for
intensifying aversive pressures. A standard is a level of achievement;
only under a particular philosophy of education is it a criterion upon
which some form of punishment is contingent.
It is not difficult to explain the use of aversive control. The teacher
can easily arrange aversive contingencies; his culture has already

taught him how to do so. In any case, since the immediate effects are
clear-cut, effective techniques are easily learned. When the control
begins early and is maintained consistently, and particularly when it
takes the moderate form of “gentle admonition,” by-products are
minimized. Systems which are basically aversive have produced welldisciplined, obedient, industrious, and eventually informed and skilled
students sometimes to the envy of teachers who cannot skillfully use
the same techniques. Even the students themselves may be impressed
and may return years later to thank their teachers for having beaten or
ridiculed them.
Aversive control can be defended as “nature’s way.” In learning to
turn a hand spring, a child improves by avoiding bumps and bruises.
The natural environment teaches a person to act in ways which resolve
puzzlement or reduce the threat of not knowing. Why should the
teacher not imitate nature and arrange comparable aversive
contingencies, such as puzzling the student to induce him to think or
making him curious to induce him to explore. But nature, as we shall
see later (page 154), is not always an admirable teacher. Its aversive
contingencies are not a model to be copied but a standard to be
excelled.
Aversive contingencies also provide an opportunity for the student to
learn to adjust to the unpleasant and painful, to act effectively when
threatened, to submit to pain, but they are usually not well designed for
that purpose. As Rousseau pointed out (see page 87), a child may be
taught to cope with aversive stimulation, but the required contingencies
are not easily combined with contingencies designed to teach other
things.
Aversive control is no doubt sanctioned in part because it is
compatible with prevailing philosophies of government and religion. It
is not only the teacher who holds the student responsible for doing
what he ought to do or punishes him “justly” when he fails. It is not
only the failing student who is told that “ignorance is no excuse.”
Schools and colleges must, of course, share in the ethical and legal
control of the societies which support them and of which they are a
part, and they have comparable problems of their own to which
aversive control has always seemed relevant, but, as we shall see in
Chapter 9, alternative courses of action should be considered. Existing
systems with their unfortunate by-products cannot be defended as
necessary evils until we are sure that other solutions cannot be found.
Most teachers are humane and well disposed. They do not want to

threaten their students yet they find themselves doing so. They want to
help but their offers are often declined. Most students are well
disposed. They want an education, yet they cannot force themselves to
study, and they know they are wasting time. For reasons which they
have probably not correctly identified, many are in revolt. Why should
education continue to use the aversive techniques to which all this is so
obviously due? Evidently because effective alternatives have not been
found. It is not enough simply to abandon aversive measures. A
Summerhill (30) is therapeutic not educational: by withholding
punishment teachers may help students who have been badly treated
elsewhere and prepare them to be taught, but something else is needed.
Tolstoy soon abandoned the school for the children of his serfs in
which no child was obliged to go to school or, when in school, to pay
attention, and similar experiments by the anarchists and one by
Bertrand Russell also failed.

TELLING AND SHOWING
A child sees things and talks about them accurately afterward. He
listens to news and gossip and passes it along. He recounts in great
detail the plot of a movie he has seen or a book he has read. He seems
to have a “natural curiosity,” a “love of knowledge,” an “inherent wish
to learn.” Why not take advantage of these natural endowments and
simply bring the student into contact with the world he is to learn
about? There are practical problems, of course. Only a small part of the
real world can be brought into the classroom even with the aid of films,
tape recorders, and television, and only a small part of what remains
can be visited outside. Words are easily imported, but the verbal
excesses of classical education have shown how easily this fact may
lead to dangerous overemphasis. Within reasonable limits, however, is
it not possible to teach simply by giving the student an opportunity to
learn in a natural way?
Unfortunately, a student does not learn simply when he is shown or
told. Something essential to his natural curiosity or wish to learn is
missing from the classroom. What is missing, technically speaking, is
“positive reinforcement.” In daily life the student looks, listens, and
remembers because certain consequences then follow. He learns to
look and listen in those special ways which encourage remembering
because he is reinforced for recalling what he has seen and heard, just

as a newspaper reporter notes and remembers things he sees because he
is paid for reporting them. Consequences of this sort are lacking when a
teacher simply shows a student something or tells him something.
Rousseau was the great advocate of natural learning. Emile was to be
taught by the world of things. His teacher was to draw his attention to
that world; but otherwise his education was to be negative. There were
to be no arranged consequences. But Emile was an imaginary student
with imaginary learning processes. When Rousseau’s disciple,
Pestalozzi, tried the methods on his own flesh-and-blood son, he ran
into trouble. His diary is one of the most pathetic documents in the
history of education (17). As he walked with his young son beside a
stream, Pestalozzi would repeat several times, “Water flows downhill.”
He would show the boy that “wood swims in water and … stones
sink.” Whether the child was learning anything or not, he was not
unhappy, and Pestalozzi could believe that at least he was using the
right method. But when the world of things had to be left behind,
failure could no longer be concealed. “I could only get him to read with
difficulty; he has a thousand ways of getting out of it, and never loses
an opportunity of doing something else.” He could make the boy sit
still at his lessons by first making him “run and play out of doors in the
cold,” but Pestalozzi himself was then exhausted. Inevitably, of course,
he returned to aversive measures: “He was soon tired of learning to
read, but as I had decided that he should work at it regularly every day,
whether he liked it or not, I determined to make him feel the necessity
of doing so, from the very first, by showing him there was no choice
between this work and my displeasure, which I made him feel by
1
keeping him in.”

GETTING ATTENTION
The failure of “showing and telling” is sometimes attributed to lack
of attention. We are often aware that we ourselves are not listening or
looking carefully. If we are not to punish the student for not looking
and listening, how can we make him concentrate? One possibility is to
make sure that there is nothing else to be seen or heard. The
schoolroom is isolated and freed of distractions. Silence is often the
rule. Physical constraints are helpful. Earphones reassure the teacher
that only what is to be heard is going into the student’s ears. The TV
screen is praised for its isolation and hypnotic effect. A piece of

equipment has been proposed which achieves concentration in the
following desperate way: the student faces a brightly lighted text,
framed by walls which operate on the principle of the blinders once
worn by carriage horses. His ears are between earphones. He reads part
of the text aloud and then listens to his recorded voice as he reads it
again. If he does not learn what he reads, it is certainly not because he
has not seen it!
A less coercive practice is to make what is to be seen or heard
attractive and attention-compelling. The advertiser faces the same
problem as the teacher, and his techniques have been widely copied in
the design of textbooks, films, and classroom practices. Bright colors,
variety, sudden change, big type, animated sequences—all these have
at least a temporary effect in inducing the student to look and listen.
They do not, however, teach the student to look and listen, because
they occur at the wrong time. A similar weakness is seen in making
school itself pleasant. Attractive architecture, colorful interiors,
comfortable furniture, congenial social arrangements, naturally
interesting subjects—these are all reinforcing, but they reinforce only
the behaviors they are contingent upon. An attractive school building
reinforces the behavior of coming in sight of it. A colorful and
comfortable classroom reinforces the behavior of entering it. Roughly
speaking, these things could be said to strengthen a positive attitude
toward school. But they provide merely the setting for instruction.
They do not teach what students are in school to learn.
In the same way audio-visual aids usually come at the wrong time to
strengthen the forms of behavior which are the principal concern of the
teacher. An interesting page printed in four colors reinforces the
student simply for opening the book and looking at it. It does not
reinforce reading the page or even examining it closely; certainly it
does not reinforce those activities which result in effective recall of
what is seen. An interesting lecturer holds his listeners in the sense that
they look at and listen to him, just as an interesting demonstration film
reinforces the behavior of watching it, but neither the lecture nor the
film necessarily reinforces listening or listening in those special ways
which further recall. In good instruction interesting things should
happen after the student has read a page or listened or looked with care.
The four-color picture should become interesting when the text which
accompanies it has been read. One stage in a lecture or film should be
interesting only if earlier stages have been carefully examined and
remembered. In general, naturally attractive and interesting things

further the primary goals of education only when they enter into much
more subtle contingencies of reinforcement than are usually
represented by audio-visual aids.

MAKING MATERIAL EASY TO REMEMBER
It is possible that students may be induced to learn by making
material not only attractive but memorable. An obvious example is
making material easy. The child first learns to write in manuscript
because it resembles the text he is learning to read; he may learn to
read material printed in a phonetic alphabet; he may learn to spell only
words he will actually use; if he cannot read he can listen to recorded
speech. This sort of simplification shows a lack of confidence in
methods of teaching and often merely postpones the teacher’s task, but
it is sometimes a useful strategy. Material which is well organized is
also, of course, easier to learn.
Some current psychological theories suggest that material may be
made memorable in another way. Various laws of perception imply that
an observer cannot help seeing things in certain ways. The stimulus
seems to force itself upon the organism. Optical illusions are often
cited as examples. These laws suggest the possibility that material may
be presented in a form in which it is irresistibly learned. Material is to
be so “structured” that it is readily—and almost necessarily
—“grasped.” Instructional examples are, however, far less persuasive
than the demonstrations offered in support of them. In trying to assign
an important function to the material to be learned, it is particularly
easy to overlook other conditions under which learning actually occurs.

THE TEACHER AS MIDWIFE
No matter how attractive, interesting, and well structured material
may be, the discouraging fact is that it is often not learned. Rather than
continue to ask why, many educational theorists have concluded that
the teacher cannot really teach at all but can only help the student learn.
The dominant metaphor goes back to Plato. As Emile Bréhier puts it,
“Socrates … possessed no other art but maieutics, his mother
Phaenarete’s art of delivering; he drew out from souls what they have
in them …” (7). The student already knows the truth; the teacher
simply shows him that he knows. As we have seen, however, there is

no evidence that the boy in the scene from the Meno learned anything.
He could not have reconstructed the theorem by himself when Socrates
had finished, and Socrates says as much later in the dialogue: “If
someone will keep asking him these same questions often and in
various forms, you can be sure that in the end he will know about them
2
as accurately as anybody.” (Socrates was a frequency theorist!)
It must be admitted that the assignment was difficult. The boy was
starting from scratch. When Polya (33) uses the same technique in
presiding at the birth of the formula for the diagonal of a parallelepiped
his students make a more positive contribution because they have
already had some geometry, but any success due to previous teaching
weakens the claim for maieutics. And Polya’s promptings and
questionings give more help than he wants to admit.
It is only because mathematical proofs seem to arise from the nature
of things that they can be said in some sense to be “known by
everyone” and simply waiting to be drawn out. Even Socrates could not
argue that the soul knows the facts of history or a second language.
Impregnation must precede parturition. But is it not possible that a
presentation which has not seemed to be learned is the seed from which
knowledge grows to be delivered by the teacher? Perhaps the
intellectual midwife is to show the student that he remembers what he
has already been shown or told. In The Idea of a University (31)
Cardinal Newman gave an example of the maieutic method applied to
acquired knowledge. It will stir painful memories in many teachers. A
tutor is talking with a candidate about a bit of history—a bit of history,
in fact, in which Plato’s Menon lost his life.
T. It is the Anabasis you take up? … What is the meaning of the word Anabasis? C. is silent.
T. You know very well; take your time, and don’t be alarmed. Anabasis means … C. An ascent…
.
T. Who ascended? C. The Greeks, Xenophon.
T. Very well: Xenophon and the Greeks; the Greeks ascended. To what did they ascend? C.
Against the Persian king: they ascended to fight the Persian king.
T. That is right … an ascent; but I thought we called it a descent when a foreign army carried war
into a country? C. is silent.
T. Don’t we talk of a descent of barbarians? C. Yes
T. Why then are the Greeks said to go up? C. They went up to fight the Persian king.
T. Yes; but why up … why not down? C. They came down afterwards, when they retreated back to
Greece.
T. Perfectly right; they did … but could you give no reason why they are said to go up to Persia,

not down? C. They went up to Persia.
T. Why do you not say they went down? C. pauses, then, … They went down to Persia.
T. You have misunderstood me.

Newman warned his reader that the Candidate is “deficient to a great
extent … not such as it is likely that a respectable school would turn
out.” He recognized a poor student, but not a poor method. Thousands
of teachers have wasted years of their lives in exchanges which have
been no more profitable—and all to the greater glory of maieutics and
out of a conviction that telling and showing are not only inadequate but
wrong.
Although the soul has perhaps not always known the truth nor ever
been confronted with it in a half-forgotten experience, it may still seek
it. If the student can be taught to learn from the world of things,
nothing else will ever have to be taught. This is the method of
discovery. It is designed to absolve the teacher from a sense of failure
by making instruction unnecessary. The teacher arranges the
environment in which discovery is to take place, he suggests lines of
inquiry, he keeps the student within bounds. The important thing is that
he should tell him nothing.
The human organism does, of course, learn without being taught. It
is a good thing that this is so, and it would no doubt be a good thing if
more could be learned in that way. Students are naturally interested in
what they learn by themselves because they would not learn if they
were not, and for the same reason they are more likely to remember
what they learn in that way. There are reinforcing elements of surprise
and accomplishment in personal discovery which are welcome
3
alternatives to traditional aversive consequences. But discovery is no
solution to the problems of education. A culture is no stronger than its
capacity to transmit itself. It must impart an accumulation of skills,
knowledge, and social and ethical practices to its new members. The
institution of education is designed to serve this purpose. It is quite
impossible for the student to discover for himself any substantial part
of the wisdom of his culture, and no philosophy of education really
proposes that he should. Great thinkers build upon the past, they do not
waste time in rediscovering it. It is dangerous to suggest to the student
that it is beneath his dignity to learn what others already know, that
there is something ignoble (and even destructive of “rational powers”)
in memorizing facts, codes, formulae, or passages from literary works,
and that to be admired he must think in original ways. It is equally

dangerous to forgo teaching important facts and principles in order to
give the student a chance to discover them for himself. Only a teacher
who is unaware of his effects on his students can believe that children
actually discover mathematics, that (as one teacher has written) in
group discussions they “can and do figure out all of the relationships,
facts, and procedures that comprise a full program in math.”
There are other difficulties. The position of the teacher who
encourages discovery is ambiguous. Is he to pretend that he himself
does not know? (Socrates said Yes. In Socratic irony those who know
enjoy a laugh at the expense of those who do not.) Or, for the sake of
encouraging a joint venture in discovery, is the teacher to choose to
teach only those things which he himself has not yet learned? Or is he
frankly to say, “I know, but you must find out” and accept the
consequences for his relations with his students?
Still another difficulty arises when it is necessary to teach a whole
class. How are a few good students to be prevented from making all the
discoveries? When that happens, other members of the class not only
miss the excitement of discovery but are left to learn material presented
in a slow and particularly confusing way. Students should, of course,
be encouraged to explore, to ask questions, to study by themselves, to
be “creative.” When properly analyzed, as we shall see in Chapter 6,
the kinds of behavior referred to in such expressions can be taught. It
does not follow, however, that they must be taught by the method of
discovery.

THE IDOLS OF THE SCHOOL
Effective instructional practices threaten the conception of teaching
as a form of maieutics. If we suppose that the student is to “exercise his
rational powers,” to “develop his mind,” or to learn through “intuition
or insight,” then it may indeed be true that the teacher cannot teach but
can only help the student learn. But these goals can be restated in terms
of explicit changes in behavior, and effective methods of instruction
can then be designed.
In his famous four idols, Francis Bacon formulated some of the
reasons why men arrive at false ideas. He might have added two special
Idols of the School which affect those who want to improve teaching.
The Idol of the Good Teacher is the belief that what a good teacher can
do, any teacher can do. Some teachers are, of course, unusually

effective. They are naturally interesting people, who make things
interesting to their students. They are skillful in handling students, as
they are skillful in handling people in general. They can formulate facts
and principles and communicate them to others in effective ways.
Possibly their skills and talents will someday be better understood and
successfully imparted to new teachers. At the moment, however, they
are true exceptions. The fact that a method proves successful in their
hands does not mean that it will solve important problems in education.
The Idol of the Good Student is the belief that what a good student
can learn, any student can learn. Because they have superior ability or
have been exposed to fortunate early environments, some students
learn without being taught. It is quite possible that they learn more
effectively when they are not taught. Possibly we shall someday
produce more of them. At the moment, however, the fact that a method
works with good students does not mean that it will work with all. It is
possible that we shall progress more rapidly toward effective education
by leaving the good teacher and the good student out of account
altogether. They will not suffer, because they do not need our help. We
may then devote ourselves to the discovery of practices which are
appropriate to the remaining—what?—ninety-five percent of teachers
and students.
The Idols of the School explain some of the breathless excitement
with which educational theorists return again and again to a few
standard solutions. Perhaps we should regard them as merely two
special cases of a more general source of error, the belief that personal
experience in the classroom is the primary source of pedagogical
wisdom. It is actually very difficult for teachers to profit from
experience. They almost never learn about their long-term successes or
failures, and their short-term effects are not easily traced to the
practices from which they presumably arose. Few teachers have time to
reflect on such matters, and traditional educational research has given
them little help. A much more effective kind of research is now
becoming possible. Teaching may be defined as an arrangement of
contingencies of reinforcement under which behavior changes.
Relevant contingencies can be most successfully analyzed in studying
the behavior of one student at a time under carefully controlled
conditions. Few educators are aware of the extent to which human
behavior is being examined in arrangements of this sort, but a true
technology of teaching is imminent. It is beginning to suggest effective
alternatives to the aversive practices which have caused so much

trouble.
1

A contemporary of Pestalozzi’s, Thomas Day, author of Sandford and Merton, a book for

children, “died from a kick by a horse which he was trying to break in on Rousseau’s principles, a
martyr to Reason and Nature” (37).
2
It is astonishing how seriously the scene from the Meno has been taken. Karl Popper has
recently written (34): “For Meno’s slave is helped by Socrates’ judicious questions to remember
or recapture the forgotten knowledge which his soul possessed in its ante-natal state of
omniscience. It is, I believe, this famous Socratic method, called in the Theaetetus the art of
midwifery or maieutic, to which Aristotle alluded when he said that Socrates was the inventor of
the method of induction.”
3
As Pascal pointed out, “Reasons which one has discovered oneself are usually more
persuasive than those which have turned up in the thinking of others”—but not because the
reasons are proprietary; one discovers a rule describing contingencies of reinforcement only after
having been exposed to the contingencies. The rule seems to the discoverer particularly apropos
because it is supported by the variables it describes.

6

TEACHING THINKING
The early history of programmed instruction has led to some
misunderstanding. Programming has been most quickly adopted in
industry, where objectives can be clearly defined and methods easily
changed and where the resulting gains, often expressed in dollars and
cents, naturally lead to administrative action. In schools, colleges, and
graduate schools it is much more difficult to define goals and to change
practices, and gains from improvement are often too vague or remote to
affect administrators. The more rapid adoption by industry has
suggested that the scope of programmed instruction is limited, and the
conclusion seems to be confirmed by the fact that most of the programs
suitable for school or college use are designed either to transmit verbal
knowledge or to develop basic motor and perceptual skills. These are
the subjects most often taught, and for practical and commercial
reasons programs have been constructed to teach them. The emphasis
comes from the educational establishment, not from the nature of
programming, but programming has suffered from guilt by association.
It is widely believed that it is useful only in the transmission of
knowledge and simple skills.
Some critics have gone further. They have argued that its very
success works against the attainment of special objectives. If traditional
methods are less efficient in teaching some things, it is because they are
designed to teach other things as well—things which are not only out
of reach of programmed instruction but somehow threatened by it. Any
kind of effective teaching can be criticized in this way. The student
who is well taught has no opportunity to learn how to learn—an
opportunity enjoyed by those who are badly taught or not taught at all.
Every problem solved with the help of a teacher is one problem less for
the student to learn how to solve by himself. The more successfully the
teacher spreads knowledge before the student as terra cognita, the
fewer the chances to learn to explore the unknown. In full possession of
conclusions reached and decisions taken, he has no chance to learn how
to conclude or decide. The better his acquaintance with the established
methods and views of others, the poorer his opportunity to be original
or creative. If there is any one word for what seems to be missing when
teaching is too successful, it is the chance to learn to think.
It is important that the student should learn without being taught,

solve problems by himself, explore the unknown, make decisions, and
behave in original ways, and these activities should, if possible, be
taught. But when? The traditional strategy has been to teach thinking
while teaching subject matter, and some sort of conflict is then
inevitable. Instruction designed simply to transmit what is already
known has often neglected the teaching of thinking. Some recent
reforms have swung to the other extreme: in making sure that the
student learns how to think, they neglect the transmission of what is
known. It may appear that the problem is to find some sort of balance,
but only if the assignments are carried out at the same time. If thinking
can be analyzed and taught separately, the already-known can be
transmitted with maximal efficiency.
This alternative has not been thoroughly explored because it is not
compatible with traditional views of thinking. When we say that we
want students to think, what do we really want them to do? It is as
important to define the terminal behavior in teaching thinking as in
teaching knowledge. How can it be done?
The traditional view is that thinking is an obscure, intellectual,
“cognitive” activity—something which goes on in the mind and
requires the use of rational powers and faculties. It leads to action when
the thoughts to which it gives rise are expressed, but it is not itself
behavior. It can sometimes be observed by the thinker, but it can also
be unconscious, and introspective accounts are therefore not very
consistent or helpful. Outstanding instances of thinking seem especially
likely to arise from obscure intuitions or insights, and great thinkers
seldom have great thoughts about thinking. This is particularly
unfortunate because thinking in this sense is never observed by anyone
except the thinker. (If we believe that others think as we do, it is only
because they arrive at the same expressed conclusions, given the same
public premises.)
So defined, thinking is hard to study. Cognitive psychologists tend to
confine themselves to the structure of expressed thoughts—to the
outcomes of thinking rather than thinking itself. The variables to which
structure is most commonly related cannot be manipulated. Time is
perhaps the best example: the products of various cognitive activities
are studied as a function of age, as in the work of Piaget. The
investigator can then turn from the shadowy processes of thinking to
the conspicuous processes of development and growth. Sex, race,
cultural history, and personality are other variables which are said to
affect thinking in this sense but which are either uncontrollable or not

substantially controlled in the research at hand.
Those who study thinking experimentally may not suffer greatly
from the limitations imposed by variables of this sort, but that is not
true of the teacher. He needs to control his conditions. He can take little
satisfaction in simply waiting for his students to grow older. He cannot
change their sex or race, and their personalities and cultural histories
are practically out of reach. How, then, can he bring about the changes
in behavior which are said to show that his students are learning to
think? Possessing no clear-cut description of the behavior he is to set
up and having no apparent access to controllable variables, he is forced
back upon the notion of exercise. He sets problems to be solved and
reinforces the student when he solves them or punishes him when he
does not. In this way he “strengthens rational powers” in a sort of
intellectual muscle-building.
He may go somewhat further by arranging tasks in order of
increasing difficulty: the student strengthens his mental muscles on an
easy problem before moving on to a harder one. This rudimentary
programming is possible because it does not require any knowledge of
thinking. One might teach high-jumping with the same technique—
setting the bar at a given height, inducing the student to jump, and
moving the bar up or down as the outcome dictates. It is not necessary
to know anything about jumping. The student will learn to clear the bar
at a respectable height, but he will almost certainly not jump well, for
he cannot profit from what others have learned about good form.
Similarly, a student may learn to think when the teacher simply poses
problems and reinforces solutions, but he will almost always think
inefficiently rather than with the good form which others have
discovered before him.
Exercising rational powers is a sink-or-swim technique, and it is no
more successful in teaching thinking than in teaching swimming. If we
throw a lot of children into a pool, some of them will manage to get to
the edge and climb out. We may claim to have taught them to swim,
although most of them swim badly. Others go to the bottom, and we
rescue them. We do not see those who go to the bottom when we teach
thinking, and many of those who survive think badly. The method does
not teach; it simply selects those who learn without being taught.
Selection is always more wasteful than instruction and is especially
harmful when it takes its place. Schools and colleges have come to rely
more and more on selecting students who do not need to be taught, and
in doing so they have come to pay less and less attention to teaching.

Among current proposals for reform, programmed instruction is almost
unique in focusing on the learning process and in suggesting practices
which actually teach rather than select those who learn without being
taught. The issue is crucial in teaching thinking.
The good high-jumping coach is less concerned with whether the bar
is cleared than with form or style. Clearing the bar usually sustains
good form in an accomplished jumper, but it produces it only by
accident. Special reinforcers must be made contingent on the
topography of the behavior rather than its outcome. Only under rare
circumstances will the ultimate advantages of thinking teach a student
to think. The teacher must arrange effective contingencies which
respect the topography of thinking. Scientific help is needed. Research
on the structure of expressed thoughts, relevant perhaps to evaluating
the outcomes of thinking, has little to say about techniques. A more
helpful formulation can be derived from the experimental analysis of
behavior.

THINKING AS BEHAVIOR
“To think” often means simply to behave. In this sense we are said to
think verbally or nonverbally, mathematically, musically, socially,
politically, and so on. In a slightly different sense, it means to behave
with respect to stimuli. A man may think it is raining when he has been
wet by a lawn sprinkler beyond a hedge. No special problem arises in
teaching the repertoires which are exhibited as we think in either of
these senses.
Thinking is also identified with certain behavioral processes, such as
learning, discriminating, generalizing, and abstracting. These are not
behavior but changes in behavior. There is no action, mental or
otherwise. When we teach a child to press a button by reinforcing his
response with candy, it adds nothing to say that he then responds
because he “knows” that pressing the button will produce candy. When
we teach him to press a red button but not a green, it adds nothing to
say that he now “discriminates” or “tells the difference between” red
and green. When we teach him to press a red button and then discover
that he will press an orange button as well, though with a lower
probability, it adds nothing to say that he has “generalized” from one
color to another. When we bring the response under the control of a
single property of stimuli, it adds nothing to say that the child has

formed an “abstraction.” We bring about the changes which define
processes of this sort, but we do not teach the processes, and no special
techniques are needed to teach thinking in this sense.
Certain kinds of behavior traditionally identified with thinking must,
however, be analyzed and taught as such. Some parts of our behavior
alter and improve the effectiveness of other parts in what may be called
intellectual self-management. Faced with a situation in which no
effective behavior is available (in which we cannot emit a response
which is likely to be reinforced), we behave in ways which make
effective behavior possible (we improve our chances of reinforcement).
In doing so, technically speaking, we execute a “precurrent” response
which changes either our environment or ourselves in such a way that
“consummatory” behavior occurs. (For a more detailed analysis, see
(46).)

ATTENDING
A rather simple example of precurrent behavior which illustrates the
difference between leaving the student to discover techniques for
himself and giving him instruction in self-management is attention. If
we were to respond with the same speed and energy to every aspect of
the world around us, we should be hopelessly confused. We must
respond only to selected features. But how are they selected? Why do
we look at one thing rather than another? How do we observe the shape
of an object while paying no attention to its color? What is happening
when we listen only to the cello in a recorded string quartet?
Some selective mechanisms are, of course, genetic. We respond only
to those energies which affect our receptors, and even though we
possess both sensitive eyes and ears, we may nevertheless be “earminded” or “eye-minded.” Some stimuli elicit or release reflex or
instinctive responses, as when we are alerted by a loud or unusual
noise. Stimuli of this sort are used to get attention. The teacher induces
the student to look at an object by isolating it from other attentiongetting things or by showing it suddenly or moving it about. He induces
him to listen to what he is saying by speaking loudly or varying his
speed or intonation. So-called audio-visual materials—for example,
brightly colored textbooks and animated films—are made attractive on
the same principles. None of this teaches the student to pay attention,
and it may actually make him less likely to pay attention to things

which are not on their face interesting.
The student can be induced to act selectively to special features of
the environment by arranging contingencies of reinforcement. Roughly
speaking, he can be taught that some features of the environment are
“worth responding to.” The central process is discrimination, and
instruction consists simply in arranging appropriate contingencies.
(When we appear to short-circuit the process by pointing to a stimulus
or otherwise calling attention to it, we are actually taking advantage of
similar, if more complex, contingencies in the student’s history.) There
is no special problem in teaching the student to pay attention in this
sense.
To attend to something as a form of self-management is to respond
to it in such a way that subsequent behavior is more likely to be
reinforced. The precurrent behavior may be learned or unlearned.
When we turn our eyes toward an object and focus upon it, or sniff an
odor, or move a liquid about on the tongue, or slide our fingers over a
surface, we make a stimulus more effective. There are two stages: (1)
attending to a given state of affairs and (2) responding to it in some
other way. In the normal course of events the reinforcement of the
second stage strengthens the first.
In sink-or-swim instruction reinforcement is also contingent on the
second stage. We set tasks which demand attention and reinforce the
student when he is successful or punish him when he is not,
presumably because he has or has not paid attention. He is left to
discover how to pay attention for himself. The method often works. A
child can be taught to match colors with the device shown in Figure 13
if he is reinforced when he presses the panel which is of the same color
as the sample panel. He must, of course, look at the sample. He will
probably learn to do so if he is reinforced when he presses the matching
panel and mildly punished when he presses other panels. But a better
technique is to teach the precurrent behavior directly. For example, if
the machine requires him to press the sample panel before the other
panels are illuminated, looking at the sample (in the act of pressing it)
will be immediately reinforced by the illumination of the other panels.
We achieve the same result when we warn a child to “stop and look”
when he starts to respond without having done so.
In a simple example of this sort the gain from direct instruction may
not be great, but some techniques of attending to a stimulus are learned
only slowly, if at all, when reinforcement is confined to the second
stage. Very few people learn to look slightly to one side of an object in

order to respond to it more effectively in night vision unless they are
specifically taught to do so. Specific contingencies may be needed to
teach a baseball batter to “keep his eye on the ball,” particularly
because natural contingencies are opposed to the behavior (it is
dangerous to look at a ball at the moment of impact, and the flight of
the ball a moment later is the principal reinforcing consequence).
Simply reinforcing a child when he reads a text correctly may be much
less effective than special contingencies which induce him to read from
left to right or to read a block of words at a glance. Another way to
attend to stimuli so that one may respond to them more effectively is to
construct supplemental stimuli. We do this when we point to words we
are reading or follow a voice in a recorded fugue by singing or beating
time with it or by moving our eyes along a score. Techniques of this
sort are not likely to be learned simply because behavior which
presupposes them is reinforced.
In short, much of the elaborate art of looking and listening cannot be
taught simply by reinforcing the student when he responds in ways
which show that he has previously looked and listened carefully. Direct
instruction is needed.

COVERT BEHAVIOR
Before turning to kinds of self-management which are more likely to
be called thinking, it will be well to note a special characteristic
responsible for much confusion in the field. Since precurrent behavior
operates mainly to make subsequent behavior more effective, it need
not have public manifestations. Any behavior may recede to the private
or covert level so long as the contingencies of reinforcement are
maintained, and they are so maintained when reinforcement is either
automatic or derived from the effectiveness of subsequent overt
behavior. As a result, much of the precurrent behavior involved in
thinking is not obvious. It is therefore easily assumed to have
nonphysical dimensions and likely to be neglected by the teacher.
The behavior most easily observed at the covert level is verbal. We
speak to ourselves as we speak aloud and respond as we respond to the
behavior of others or to ourselves when we speak aloud. What we say
is sometimes immediately and automatically reinforcing—for example,
when we silently recite a poem we like—but reinforcement is more
often deferred—for example, when we talk to ourselves while solving a

problem but are reinforced only when the solution has been made
public. The special conspicuousness of covert verbal behavior led John
B. Watson to hazard the guess that all thought was subvocal speech,
but nonverbal behavior may be covert. It is perhaps easier to talk to
oneself about riding a bicycle than to “ride a bicycle to oneself,” but
nonverbal behavior may be automatically reinforcing or reinforced
because of its role in intellectual self-management. The ultimate
dimensions of covert behavior are not of interest here, beyond the
requirement that the behavior be self-stimulating. The main issue is
accessibility to instructional contingencies. When we teach simply by
reinforcing successful outcomes, it does not matter whether precurrent
behavior is private or public, but in direct instruction we cannot dispose
of the problem that way.
The solution is simply to teach the behavior at the overt level.
Although a child eventually speaks to himself silently, we teach him to
speak by differentially reinforcing his audible behavior. Although he
later reads books and recites passages to himself, we teach him as he
reads and recites aloud. We teach mathematical problem solving in
overt form, though much of it eventually recedes to the covert level.
Covert behavior makes fewer demands on the current environment and
is easy, quick, and secret, but so far as we know, there is no kind of
thinking which must be covert. On the other hand, there are times when
the overt form is preferred or required. A thinker returns to the overt
level, for example, when covert self-stimulation is inadequate; he may
begin a mathematical calculation privately but start speaking aloud or
making notes when the work grows difficult or distractions arise. We
eventually insist that a child think silently most of the time, and
material which is automatically reinforcing is helpful in encouraging
recession to the covert level. External contingencies may be withdrawn
gradually so that automatic reinforcement can take over.
Covert perceptual behavior is an especially difficult subject. How
does a child learn to “see things which are not really there”?
Traditional formulations of visualizing or imagining are not very
satisfactory. In general it is assumed that a person first somehow
constructs an “image” and then looks at it. We can avoid this
duplication by assuming that when a visual object is automatically
reinforcing, the behavior of seeing it may become so strong that it
occurs in the absence of the object (53). It is learned when the object is
present. The child who sees the objects and events described by a
storyteller does so only because he has been exposed to complex

contingencies involving actual events, pictured or otherwise. (Such
contingencies are not as common as they once were. With audio-visual
aids and devices the modern child is not often required to “see things
which are not really there.” He does not visualize very much when
being read to from books with pictures in four colors on every page.
Moving pictures and television remove practically all occasions for
covert seeing. This is education for Life or the comics, but it does not
prepare the student to read unillustrated materials.)
Covert perceptual behavior in intellectual self-management is
usually taught, if at all, by reinforcing successful outcomes. We
reinforce a student when he correctly describes or copies a picture he
has seen some time before. He may find it helpful to see the picture
again covertly, but we have not taught him to do so. A problem in
“mental arithmetic” may require a good deal of covert seeing, but
reinforcement is usually reserved for the overt solution. The student
who is asked to “bound” a country may see a map, although he is
reinforced only for naming contiguous countries. These forms of
instruction are also becoming less common.
We may program covert seeing by setting problems of increasing
difficulty. We ask the student to describe or copy something at first
while he is looking at it but then only after increasing intervals of time.
According to Winston Churchill (9) Whistler used a technique of this
sort. He put his model in the basement and his students with their
canvases and brushes on the first floor. The students went to the
basement, looked at the model, and returned to the first floor to paint.
When they improved, they were moved to the second floor. According
to Churchill, some of them eventually reached the sixth floor. Another
kind of programming in terms of difficulty consists in differentially
reinforcing the delayed copying of progressively more subtle features.
Though this is in a sense programmed instruction, the reinforcement
is still contingent on outcome. The nature of covert perceptual behavior
may lead us to conclude that nothing else is possible, but overt
techniques of observing are relevant. So far as we know, nothing is
ever seen covertly which has not already been seen overtly at least in
fragmentary form. Covert seeing may therefore be taught as overt
seeing. Some ways of looking are especially effective. In describing or
copying an object we move the eyes along salient features, look back
and forth to gauge distances, look quickly from one feature to another
to emphasize differences, view from different angles, gesture or
otherwise create supplemental stimuli which emphasize lines and

curves. Versions of such behavior may survive in covert form. The
change in level may be facilitated by gradually weakening the external
stimulus—as in teaching the student to see forms which are slightly out
of focus, or crudely sketched, or presented as parts of puzzle pictures.
In summary, then, the self-management exemplified by paying
attention, and by the more characteristic forms of thinking to which we
now turn, is hard to observe and teach at the covert level. Skillful
thinkers may internalize their behavior to the point at which even the
thinker himself cannot see what he is doing. Nevertheless, we can teach
relevant techniques at the overt level, and we can to some extent
facilitate the recession to the covert level if this is desirable.

LEARNING HOW TO LEARN
“To study” often means simply to pay close attention: we study a
situation carefully so that we can then act more effectively. A different
kind of studying, particularly important to student and teacher, has the
effect of facilitating recall. It is more than close observation. A book
we are reading for pleasure may command our full attention, but we
nevertheless forget it quickly. We read light fiction, as we listen to
most music, because of its immediate effects. It often happens that we
find such a book or piece of music familiar when we encounter it again
and when asked about it may even be able to say it was enjoyable or
exciting, although we cannot describe the plot or characters, or hum,
sing, or play the music. Even a detective story which depends for its
effect on the reader’s ignorance of the outcome can often be reread
with pleasure after a few years. To study is to read in a special way. We
are concerned here with the fact that we may not have a chance to learn
to study when material has been prepared so that it is easily
remembered.
The standard practice, again, is to teach studying indirectly. An
assignment is followed by a test; students who do well, presumably
because they have studied effectively, are reinforced, and those who do
not, possibly because they do not know how to study, are punished or
“failed.” The student reads carefully as a form of avoidance. He studies
to avoid not-knowing. The aversive contingencies may be fine-grained.
Materials designed to teach “reading with comprehension” often
consist of passages to be read and questions about them to be answered.
Pestalozzi, in his unpublished, The Instruction of Children in the Home

(17), offers an early example. The student is to read a page or two
beginning as follows:
There is one woman in Bonal who brings up her children better than all the others. Her name is
Gertrude (1); her husband, who is a Mason (2), is called Leonard (3). They have (4) seven
children… .

He is then to answer questions, such as:
(1) What is the name of the woman in Bonal who brings up her children better than all the rest?
(3) What is her husband’s name? (2) What is he? …

These are obviously not facts worth remembering; the material is
designed to teach ways of reading which lead to remembering. Some
help may be given by grading such material in terms of difficulty. The
material itself may be made more complex, students may be asked to
read more before questions are answered, or the time for answering
questions may be postponed.
These practices are not incompatible with programmed instruction.
The student may begin by reading a brief text and recall it in working
through a program; he then reads a longer text and recalls it in another
program; and so on. In doing so he may discover how to learn from
unprogrammed material. But this is still the standard assign-and-test
pattern. The student may discover how to study, but he is not being
1
taught.
To teach a student to study is to teach him techniques of selfmanagement which increase the likelihood that what is seen or heard
will be remembered. Word-for-word memorizing is a special case. A
student usually remembers some part of a page he has read. If he reads
it again, he remembers more. After reading it many times, he may be
able to reproduce it all. If he has done nothing more than read the page
repeatedly, however, he has not studied it in any important sense. He
has learned it simply by piling up small gains. To study a page so that it
can be recalled word by word, he must respond to it in ways which
increase the chances that he will speak as if he were reading the page
when it is not actually present. The page must actually be recalled—
though not necessarily all at once. Its effectiveness as a stimulus must
be progressively reduced as the response of “reading it in its absence”
gains strength. The student can probably repeat a short sentence he has
just read. By waiting a moment before repeating it, he weakens the

control exerted by the text. (He recalls the page bit by bit just because
too much time would otherwise elapse to make recall of the first part
possible when he has reached the end.) The student who knows how to
study knows how much to recall at a time and how long to wait before
trying. As we shall see in Chapter 10, learning appears to be maximal if
the response is emitted just before it grows too weak to be recalled.
Another way of weakening a stimulus is to reduce its clarity,
duration, or extent. The student who knows how to study glances
quickly at a text to expose a necessary word or two briefly and possibly
only in peripheral vision, or he uncovers parts of the text as needed.
(There are strong opposing contingencies. The student is usually
reinforced, by himself or others, for responding adequately at the
moment, and he may therefore take steps which permit him to do so
even though he does not then increase the probability that he will
respond in the future. It is difficult to resist getting too much help—
studying too small a section at a time, recalling it too soon, or reading
the whole text rather than glimpsing only a small part of it as a
prompt.)
Learning “what a page is about” is, of course, different from learning
it word for word. We say that the student is to paraphrase the text or
state a few of its points, but these are elliptical expressions. Linguistic
and psycholinguistic formulations of verbal knowledge almost always
appeal to meanings or ideas: the student is to discover the propositions
expressed by a text so that he can express them himself, quite possibly
in other words. This is far from an objective description of what
happens, and it is not surprising that the long history of concepts like
idea and meaning has not been marked by the discovery of better
methods of instruction.
An analysis of verbal behavior throws some light on this difficult
subject (47). When a student learns a page word for word (possibly
without understanding it), the text functions as a formal stimulus
evoking a textual response and as a series of formal prompts as the
page is memorized. Eventually the student acquires a string of
intraverbal responses which permit him to reproduce the page. When
he learns what a page is about, the text supplies thematic stimuli, many
of which evoke intraverbal responses. He uses parts of the text as
thematic rather than formal prompts. The final result is also a set of
intraverbal responses, but not all of them are to be found in the text.
Good programmed instruction builds thematic relations of this sort.
The student may help himself in studying unprogrammed material by,

for example, underlining important thematic stimuli and arranging
them in outlines or summaries. Even when summaries are memorized
word for word, they still function as thematic prompts which permit the
student to construct a paraphrase.
Mnemonic devices play a role in studying. By definition a mnemonic
is easier to learn than the material it helps to recall. By reproducing a
mnemonic, verbal or perceptual, the student generates stimuli, usually
as formal or thematic prompts, which aid in either word-for-word or
paraphrased recall. Some mnemonics are constructed on the spot while
studying, others are learned in advance and connected with current
material. Fragmentary mnemonics probably play a more substantial
role in studying than is commonly supposed.
Techniques of studying are particularly likely to recede to the covert
level, where they may be maintained through their contribution to
effective recall or other use. They must be taught at the overt level,
however, if instructional contingencies are to respect topography rather
than mere outcome.

SOLVING PROBLEMS
Thinking is often called problem solving. The term can be applied to
the examples we have considered: we pay attention to something in
order to solve the problem of dealing with it more effectively, and we
study something in order to solve the problem of recalling it at a later
date. The term is usually reserved, however, for precurrent activities
which facilitate behavior under a much greater variety of
circumstances. We face a problem when we cannot emit a response
which, because of some current state of deprivation or aversive
stimulation, is strong. If we are inclined to eat lobster, we face a
problem if no lobster is available. If the room is hot, we face a problem
if we cannot open the window. We solve such problems either by
changing the situation so that the response can occur (we find some
lobster or a way of opening the window) or by changing the
deprivation or aversive stimulation (we eat something else or cool the
room in some other way). (For an analysis of problem solving in this
sense, see (46).)
Almost everything we do is relevant to solving one sort of problem
or another, and we cannot learn problem solving, as we learn to pay
attention or study, by acquiring a few special techniques. There are

many ways of changing a situation so that we are more likely to
respond to it effectively. We can clarify stimuli, change them, convert
them into different modalities, isolate them, rearrange them to facilitate
comparison, group and regroup them, “organize” them, or add other
stimuli. These practices can be classified without too much trouble, but
specific techniques depend upon the problems to be solved and show a
very wide range. A teacher usually confines instruction to a small area
—he teaches problem solving in mathematics, for example, or logic, or
mechanical invention, or personal relations—and appropriate
techniques can then be specified and taught.
Faced with a given kind of problem, the student learns to behave in
ways which maximize the probability that he will find a solution. It is
not quite correct, then, to say that no effective response is available. A
solution is not available, but if the problem is soluble, a response which
will produce a solution is. Solving the problem is one step removed
from the solution—from emitting the response which causes the
problem to disappear. Roughly speaking, the student must learn to
recognize the kind of problem with which he is faced and to select an
appropriate technique. A particular difficulty arises when the problem
can be solved only through a sequence of steps, for it is then necessary
to learn a response appropriate to each step, and many of these may be
a long way from the ultimate solution.
The standard sink-or-swim technique is to set problems of a given
type, possibly graded according to difficulty, and to reinforce the
student when he solves them. When this method is used in its crudest
form, the teacher need know nothing of problem solving. A knowledge
of the outcome—whether the student’s solution is correct or not—is
sufficient. Direct instruction depends upon the type of problem. In a
familiar example, the student is taught to translate the prose statement
of a problem into algebraic symbols, to arrange or rearrange these in
standard ways, to convert one expression into another by transposing,
clearing fractions, extracting roots, and so on, and to proceed in this
fashion until an expression appears which can be solved in some way
already learned. The entire repertoire is essentially verbal and is easily
represented and taught with the help of available systems of notation.
Nonverbal problem solving—as in inventing a mechanical device
having a given effect—is not so easily described and, possibly for the
same reason, not so easily taught. Both verbal and nonverbal problemsolving repertoires may recede to the covert level, where analysis
becomes difficult, but they are taught at the overt level.

When teachers turn to direct instruction in problem solving, they are
often misled by what may be called the Formalistic Fallacy. To get the
student to execute problem-solving behavior it is tempting simply to
show him what to do. The student imitates what the teacher says, or
reads what he has written, and in doing so engages in behavior which
solves the problem. The probability that he will engage in similar
behavior in the future is not necessarily increased. Mathematics is often
“taught” by taking the student through a proof. The student does indeed
engage in the behavior which solves the problem, but if the behavior is
entirely under the control of the printed page or the teacher’s voice, it is
probably not being brought under the control of stimuli which will be
encountered in similar problems. “Giving the student reasons” why a
step is taken may bring the behavior under useful control, but it is not
necessarily the most effective way of doing so.

PRODUCTIVE THINKING
When a student has learned to recognize various kinds of problems
and apply relevant techniques, he does not seem to be “thinking” at all.
His behavior is perhaps one remove from reinforcement, but it is still
nothing more that a set of responses of specified topographies evoked
by specified occasions. The cognitive processes seem to have vanished.
When the student has learned how to attend to the environment, he has
no further need for mental screening or selection. When he has learned
how to study, he can dispense with inner processes of coding, storing,
and retrieving information. The precurrent behavior with which he
solves problems seems to become “thoughtless.” Only instruction via
the outcome of thinking may seem to preserve some mental life, but it
does this only because it does not directly teach any alternative.
Those who insist that thinking is something more than behaving will
point to as yet unanalyzed problems. Algorithmic problem solving is
perhaps not necessarily mental, but what about heuristics? There must
be problematic situations which evoke not only no response which
proves to be a solution but no precurrent behavior generating such a
response. “Productive” thinking then seems to be required. But it
survives only so long as it remains unanalyzed. Far from offering scope
for a special kind of mental activity, heuristics may be treated simply as
a set of techniques designed to solve the problem of solving problems.
Polya’s How to Solve It (33) is significantly titled. The author is

concerned with teaching students how to solve, not first-order
problems, but the second-order problem of discovering first-order
techniques. As an accomplished problem-solver, he can recommend
helpful moves. For example, he suggests that the student ask himself,
“What is the unknown?” In answering that question, the student may
convert a problem which has not seemed soluble into one to which an
available first-order technique applies. Similarly, if he will ask himself,
“Do I know a related problem?” the answer may suggest a useful firstorder technique.
The occasions upon which heuristic techniques are useful are by
definition harder to specify than those to which first-order, algorithmic
techniques apply. Moreover, the behavior which solves the problem of
solving problems is one further remove from ultimate reinforcement.
But appropriate techniques can nevertheless be analyzed and taught.
Solving the problem of solving problems then becomes as mechanical
as first-order problem solving, and there is no room left for
“productive” thinking.
If no previously learned technique of any sort applies, the problem
must be attacked by trial-and-error, which is not really a behavioral
process at all. As we have seen, it was once common to study learning
by putting an organism into a complex situation (what we should now
call a set of terminal contingencies) and watching the adaptive behavior
emerge. The organism was under strong deprivation or aversive
stimulation and hence not inactive. Most of its responses suffered
extinction, but some were reinforced. When repeatedly subjected to the
same contingencies, it usually came to respond in an effective way. But
its responses were in no important sense trials, nor were they errors
because they proved not to be solutions. Trial-and-error is at best a
process of selection in which some of the responses evoked by a given
situation prove effective. When the same terminal contingencies are
programmed, the organism may reach the same terminal behavior
without errors.
Certain precurrent behaviors of self-management are appropriate to
situations to which established problem-solving techniques cannot
possibly apply. When responding to a complex situation by trial-anderror, a student may “learn to try.” The opportunity to do so is, of
course, destroyed when terminal contingencies are effectively
programmed, but here again the behavior may be analyzed and taught.
In looking for something we have lost, there are techniques of selfmanagement which reduce the frequency of looking in the same place

more than once. There are ways of searching a field so that a lost object
is most readily found. Scientific method is in part designed to
maximize the effectiveness of exploratory behavior in this sense.
Productive thinking is sometimes identified with solutions which
have not been learned, or generated by problem-solving techniques
which have been learned, but which occur because they have “good
form” or because their structure or organization corresponds in some
way with the structure or organization of the problem. Max Wertheimer
has tried to show how the student thinks productively in discovering
how to find the area of a parallelogram (62). Wertheimer quite
correctly objects to leaving the student to “blind trial and error.” It is an
inefficient process, and the student learns nothing beyond, possibly,
how to try. He also correctly points out that the student does not learn
very much from being taught to apply a formula. True, he can then
determine the area of a parallelogram, but he has not learned much
about solving problems. Even to show him why the formula works is
not enough, especially when the demonstration is not generalized to
many kinds of parallelograms in many positions.
For Wertheimer productive thinking occurs when the student “sees”
that the protuberance on one side of a parallelogram just fills the gap on
the other. He must not see it because it has been pointed out to him,
however. The solution must come as an insight—an idea or response
which is by definition not traceable to antecedent conditions. In
Wertheimer’s example, the student does not by any means start from
scratch. He has an extensive repertoire acquired under similar
circumstances. He understands the problem, he can calculate the area
of a rectangle, and he knows something about triangles and how they
differ in size and shape. He will be more likely to have this particular
insight if he has solved comparable problems by cutting and arranging
pieces of paper or by drawing lines to divide areas into parts. So far as
productive thinking goes, it does not matter whether he has been taught
all this or has learned it from a noninstructional environment. He must
simply not have learned the particular solution at issue.
We are likely to think that this is the case if the act of “seeing” the
solution comes as a surprise. It is this characteristic of productive
thinking which is most likely to convince us that we have actually “had
an original idea.” But there is always an element of mystery in the
emission of any operant response. A stimulus never exercises complete
control. It is effective only as part of a set of conditions, which build up
to the point at which a response is emitted. There is a temporal leeway.

Thus, we may listen to a piece of music for some time before suddenly
naming it. We may look at a distant object for some time before
“seeing what it really is” or reacting to it effectively in other ways. We
may study material for some time before reproducing it correctly. In
problem solving we generate conditions which make a solution likely
to occur, but we cannot say exactly when it will occur. The behavior is
not unlawful, but we lack the information needed to predict the
moment of its occurrence with certainty. The element of surprise makes
it easy to suppose that a solution has been triggered by some such
prebehavioral event as an idea. (We must then start all over again, of
course, and explain why the idea occurred at just that time.) A response
is all the more awesome when it appears on a novel occasion
(“transferred” from rather different circumstances), and particularly
when it has extraordinary consequences (when, for example, it solves a
difficult problem).
It is no doubt hard to explain what is happening when a student “sees
that a protuberance fills a gap,” but calling it insight does not help.
Some features of visual perception may possibly be relevant, but
environmental variables cannot be dismissed. Certain resemblances to
the overt behavior of discriminating and manipulating areas are
obvious, and it would certainly be a mistake to refuse to teach
perceptual problem solving in order to preserve the fancied autonomy
of productive thinking.
The view that a productive thought is to be understood only in terms
of its structure and that its origins are necessarily inscrutable is most at
home in a thoroughgoing nativism. Jacques Hadamard’s The
Psychology of Invention in the Mathematical Field (18) has done much
to perpetuate the doctrine that thinking is essentially an unanalyzable
process of intuition. Characteristically, Hadamard must deny the
relevance of any evidence that techniques can be taught:
In some ways [Galois] reminds us of Hermite… . A curious thing is that Galois’ teacher in
mathematics in the high school, Mr. Richard, who had the merit of discovering at once his
extraordinary abilities, was also fifteen years later, the teacher of Hermite; this, however, cannot
be regarded otherwise than as a mere coincidence, since the genius of such men is evidently a gift
of nature, independent of any teaching.

HAVING IDEAS

We need not give up the effort to teach thinking just because the
moment of occurrence of an idea is not always predictable on the
available evidence. Special kinds of precurrent behavior which
encourage the appearance of ideas can be taught. They work not by
changing the environment but by changing the thinker himself.
“Having an idea” is perhaps most easily observed when the idea is
verbal. A witty remark often occurs because of the joint operation of
two variables, and we suddenly get the point of such a remark made by
someone else when we come under the control of both variables. A
metaphor is a verbal response under the control of a fragmentary
property of a stimulus, and we suddenly see the point of a metaphor
when we emit the response under the same control. In general, we
understand what someone is saying when we ourselves say it for the
same reasons, possibly only after the speaker has repeated it several
times in order to bring the appropriate variables into play (47).
A very simple example of precurrent behavior which has the effect
of encouraging the emission of a verbal response is familiar. In
recalling a name we have forgotten, we probe our behavior with
supplementary stimuli. We generate formal probes by reciting the
alphabet or by repeating a stress pattern if this has been recalled; we
generate thematic probes by reviewing occasions on which we have
used the name. We suppress competing responses which “get in the
way” and “keep the mind a blank” by refraining so far as possible from
incompatible responding. Similar techniques strengthen responses more
commonly recognized as the solutions of problems. They can all be
taught. In operation they are likely to be covert and their effects in
evoking responses hard to trace and explain. It is then particularly easy
to call them mental and allow them to go unanalyzed, but a direct
attack is worthwhile. It is not enough to encourage the student to have
ideas by reinforcing him for his verbal productions. We must teach him
how to discover what he has to say—to tease out faint responses, and
not only one response at a time but complex arrangements; not only the
single analogical or metaphorical response, but a sentence, paragraph,
chapter, or book; not only the next best move in chess, but a whole
strategy; not only one step in a proof, but a whole proof.

THE ROLE OF THE THINKER
It is quite possible that the behavior of a man thinking is the most

subtle and complex phenomenon ever submitted to scientific analysis.
In our present state of knowledge, it is easy to point to instances which
are not adequately accounted for and hence to argue that thinking in
some special sense is still out of reach. This has been the strategy in
calling a thinker productive just because his behavior cannot be traced
to antecedent conditions. It would be rash to deny the possibility of
truly productive thinking, but to assert that it exists because every
instance of thinking cannot now be explained is equally unjustified.
Even in the most difficult kinds of problematic situations a few
appropriate techniques of self-management can be identified and
taught, and others will certainly be discovered.
In a chapter of this sort it is possible to consider only a few selected
kinds of thinking and only a few familiar instances of each kind, but
these may suffice to make a point. A student thinks by manipulating
conditions of which some part of his behavior is a function. The
important fact is that another person would manipulate precisely the
same conditions to get the same result. When a student pays attention,
he does just what a teacher would do to attract and hold his attention.
When he studies, he constructs his own material—for example, he
underlines important words in a text as the author might have done to
make them memorable. He solves a problem by changing a problematic
situation just as another person would change it to get him to discover
the solution. In teaching a student to solve problems heuristically,
Polya points out, “the teacher should … ask a question or indicate a
step that could have occurred to the student himself… .” Such
questions are “equally useful to the problem solver who works by
himself.” In having a verbal idea the student strengthens his own
behavior with the same probes another person would use to discover
what the student has to say. The same variables are manipulated in the
same ways because the assignments are the same: behavior is to be
changed and it can be changed only by changing the conditions of
which it is a function.
According to this formulation, the student clearly plays an active
role. But he has been taught to do so. It seems inevitable that a
behavioral analysis must deny the student credit for learning to think.
This is a special case of a general principle. We tend to admire what we
cannot explain (55). We give a person little credit for behavior which
we can trace to conspicuous sources, particularly in the immediate
environment. We admire the student in inverse proportion to the extent
to which he has obviously been taught. The man who has not been

taught at all but who is nevertheless “well educated” is highly regarded,
and so is the student who learns in spite of bad teaching. But the
student who has been taught with maximal efficiency must share at
least some of the credit for his achievement with his teacher. The better
the teacher, the less we admire the student. When we teach through the
evaluation of outcome, we give the student full credit because we do
not really know how he learns, but precisely the same behavior,
traceable to direct instruction, is by no means so admirable.
In particular we feel the lack of aversive outcomes. A frequent
objection to programmed instruction is that it makes things too easy;
the student does not deserve to know what he has learned and cannot be
admired for his industry or courage. A related issue has to do with
blame. Teachers have always maintained that it is the student who fails,
and they can continue to do so as long as they hold the student
responsible for learning. Under direct instruction the teacher is at least
equally at fault. Moreover, successful instruction sometimes generates
objectionable behavior, and it can then be argued that bad teaching or
no teaching at all would have been preferable. It would appear that if
we are to give the student full credit when he behaves well and absolve
the teacher of blame when the student behaves badly, the teacher must
refuse to teach effectively.
Some philosophies of education make the student more admirable by
assigning to him functions which the teacher could, if he wished,
assume. I. A. Richards and Christine Gibson, for example, have been
concerned for a long time with teaching beginning reading. In a recent
report they state that it is the responsibility of the teacher to help “the
learner recognize the problems he must solve… . Instructional design
can develop only by helping the learner see a step to be taken, find
ways of taking it, and then use it as firm support for the next step that
comes into view. How and when to go on to these other steps a learner
must see for himself if what is happening educationally is to be
significant” (38). But it is the teacher of reading, or the designer of
programmed materials in reading, who can most effectively recognize
the problems to be solved, discover the steps to be taken and ways to
get the learner to take them, and decide how and when the learner is to
go on to other steps. To make the student solve the problem of learning
is to refuse to solve the problem of teaching.
It is the visibility of the past which makes the difference. We admire
the student who discovers how to learn, and we hold how-to-study
courses in low esteem. Arithmetic computation, no matter how useful,

has obviously been taught and therefore must take second place to
productive thinking, the sources of which are not easily discovered. But
as thinking is more and more successfully analyzed and can therefore
be more and more effectively taught, the distinction loses cogency. It is
inevitable that any step which improves teaching will clarify and
strengthen the role of the teacher and destroy some of the grounds upon
which in the past the student has been admired.
Certain important features of the role of the student are undoubtedly
foreshadowed in the traditional concern for personal credit. The
experimental analysis of operant conditioning offers a clearer
statement:
1. A student, like any organism, must act before he can be
reinforced. In a sense he must take the initiative. All the behavior he
eventually exhibits must have been his in some form before instruction
began. In this sense teaching leads to the “re-collection” of responses.
Conceivably this was Plato’s point in the scene in the Meno, but it is
misrepresented as the discovery of already-known truth. The extensive
verbal repertoire of an educated adult, for example, emerged from
relatively undifferentiated vocalizations, but it had not been held as a
personal possession in any important sense.
2. It is inefficient and often impossible for the teacher simply to wait
for behavior to occur so that it can be reinforced. He must induce the
student to act, but he must be careful how he does so. Getting him to
act on a given occasion may interfere with raising the probability that
he will act in the same way in the future. The metaphor of the midwife,
who is concerned with delivery rather than the original impregnation, is
misleading. The best way to help the student give birth to the answer he
is struggling to recall is to give him a strong hint or even the whole
answer, but that is not the best way to make sure that he will recall it in
the future. Polya is correct in saying that the heuristic hint, “Do you
know a related problem?”, is to be preferred to the stronger hint,
“Could you apply the theorem of Pythagoras?” The student will solve
the present problem more quickly with the stronger hint, but he will
learn more about solving future problems if the weaker hint works. As
Comenius said, “The more the teacher teaches, the less the student
learns.”
3. Instructional contingencies are usually contrived and should
always be temporary. If instruction is to have any point, the behavior it
generates will be taken over and maintained by contingencies in the
world at large. The better the teacher, the more important it is that he

free the student from the need for instructional help.
These characteristics of the learning process, which will be discussed
again in Chapter 10, are important not because they aggrandize the
contribution of the student but because the teacher who understands
them will teach more effectively and thus aggrandize the achievements
of both.
1

The phrase self-instruction is misleading. In the Self-Instruction Room of Figure 6, the student

works through programmed material, and if it is well programmed, he does not need to study in
the present sense. The term simply suggests that the student is being instructed in the absence of a
teacher. To the extent that students can be taught to study unprogrammed materials efficiently,
instruction may be forgone.

7

THE MOTIVATION OF THE STUDENT
The word student means one who studies. If the Latin root is to be
trusted, it also means one who is eager and diligent. This is sometimes
hard to believe, yet many students do study and some of them eagerly
and diligently. If this were true of all students, education would be
vastly more efficient. There is little point in building more schools,
training more teachers, and designing better instructional materials if
students will not study. The truant and dropout are conspicuous
problems, but it is the underachiever, the careless and inattentive
student, and the student who does just enough to get by who explain
why our grade schools, high schools, colleges, and graduate schools are
all running far below capacity.
We can easily invent explanations—we can say that some students
study because they have a desire to learn, an inner urge to know, an
inquisitive appetite, a love of wisdom, a natural curiosity, or some
other trait of character. We thus allay our natural curiosity and satisfy
our urge to know, but we do not improve teaching, for nothing about a
trait tells us how to alter it or even keep it alive. William James advised
teachers to fill their students with “devouring curiosity,” but he did not
explain how to do so. Only by turning to the behavior which is said to
show the possession of these traits can we search effectively for
conditions which we may change so that students will study more
effectively.
Among the observable things which seem relevant are the
consequences of studying or, roughly speaking, what the student “gets
out of” studying. At one time we should have spoken of his reasons for
studying or his purpose; but reasons and purposes are simply aspects of
the field of operant conditioning (54), and our question really comes
down to this: What reinforces the student when he studies?
We might look first at the ultimate advantages of an education—at
its utility or value. We point to consequences of this sort to induce
young people to go to school or college, or to continue to go, or to
return when they have dropped out. One conspicuous example is
money—the “dollar value of an education”—and we try to persuade
our students by comparing the incomes of educated and uneducated
people. Less mercenary advantages are the opportunities to do things
which are reinforcing but which the student cannot do until he knows

how, such as being a scientist, writer, musician, artist, or craftsman.
The advantages of a liberal education are less explicit, but the liberally
educated student enjoys things otherwise out of reach. Sheer knowing
may be worthwhile in freeing one from puzzlement, insecurity, or the
anxieties of not knowing. (These advantages fade as technological
advances make what a man has learned less important. Manual skills
lose their value under automation. Knowing how to read is less
valuable when pictures and recorded speech replace texts. Verbal
knowledge loses some of its importance when it is no longer
presupposed; a news magazine which refers to “the English novelist
Charles Dickens” or “Darwin’s Theory—of evolution through natural
selection” deprives the reader of some of what he gained from his
education if he would have responded just as well to “Dickens” or
“Darwin’s Theory.”) Another ultimate gain is in prestige. The student
joins the company of educated men and women with its honors and
cabalistic practices; he understands its allusions, enjoys its privileges,
shares its esprit de corps.
These are, indeed, some of the things a student ultimately derives
from an education, and he will probably mention them if we ask him
why he is studying, but they do not help in solving our problem. The
trouble with ultimate advantages is that they are ultimate. They come at
the end of an education—or of some substantial part of it—and cannot
be used during it as reinforcers. Their weakness is legendary. The
premedical student who badly “wants to be a doctor” gets little if any
help from that fact as he sits in his room on a given evening studying a
page of biochemistry. The higher wages of the craftsman do not make
the apprentice diligent. The would-be pianist practicing his scales is not
encouraged by the applause of the concert hall. When other reinforcers
are lacking, the classical result is a profound abulia. The student is not
only not diligent or eager, he cannot make himself study at all.
We may try to make ultimate advantages effective by talking about
them or by letting the student observe others who are enjoying them.
We tell him what is in store for him (and that is probably why he can
tell us why he is studying). But this is a rather crude use of conditioned
reinforcers which, being derived from remote ultimate consequences,
are unfortunately weak.
We often try to rescue something from ultimate advantages by
emphasizing progress toward them. In American usage, in particular, a
surprising number of words in education come from the Latin gradus.
The student receives a grade, he is in a grade, he graduates with a

degree, and enters graduate school. His progress is marked by numbers
(from 1 to 8), by two sets of ordinal terms (freshman, sophomore,
junior, and senior), and again by numbers (first-year graduate student,
second-year graduate student, and so on). But these signs of progress
toward the ultimate advantages of an education also function, if at all,
only as conditioned reinforcers and also ineffectively.

CONTRIVED PROXIMATE REINFORCERS
To arrange good instructional contingencies, the teacher needs onthe-spot consequences. Negative reinforcers were probably the first to
be used and they are still certainly the commonest. The rod or cane and
the stripping of privileges are naturally aversive; criticism and ridicule
are borrowed from the culture; and failing grades and (ironically) extra
schoolwork are contrived by the teacher. They can be used in
contingencies of reinforcement which “make the student study”—in
which, to be specific, he escapes from or avoids these kinds of aversive
stimulation. Such contingencies often work, and the result may be
superficially reinforcing to teachers, administrators, parents, and even
to students. The practice has a long history, and even today educators
often look with envy on the disciplined classroom which continues to
operate primarily under aversive control.
Serious by-products must, as we saw in Chapter 5, be taken into
account. We can avoid some of them by moderating the aversive
stimulation—by abandoning “corporal” punishment, for example, in
favor of slight but constant threats, verbal or otherwise—but even so
our students will be studying mainly to avoid the consequences of not
studying. Under aversive control they force themselves to study; they
work. Indeed, one of the ultimate advantages of an education is simply
coming to the end of it.
Quite apart from unwanted by-products, contingencies of this sort
are defective. Some results are to be expected when desired forms of
behavior directly reduce aversive stimuli, but the usual practice is to
punish behavior which is not desired. The pattern is derived from
ethical control in which behavior is actually suppressed (see Chapter
9). Here we want to generate behavior, and it is not enough to
“suppress not-behaving.” Thus, we do not strengthen good
pronunciation by punishing bad, or skillful movements by punishing
awkward. We do not make a student industrious by punishing idleness,

or brave by punishing cowardice, or interested in his work by
punishing indifference. We do not teach him to learn quickly by
punishing him when he learns slowly, or to recall what he has learned
by punishing him when he forgets, or to think logically by punishing
him when he is illogical. Under such conditions he may occasionally
discover for himself how to pay attention, be industrious, and learn and
remember, but he has not been taught. Moreover, he often satisfies the
contingencies in the most superficial way; he “attends” only by looking
at the teacher or keeping his eyes on a page, he is “industrious” only in
the sense of keeping busy. The contingencies encourage superstitious
behavior, including many maladaptive or neurotic ways of escaping
from or avoiding aversive treatment. The culture starts this, but
aversive education carries it on.
From time to time positive alternatives have been suggested. “Avoid
compulsion,” said Plato in The Republic, “and let your children’s
lessons take the form of play.” Horace, among others, recommended
rewarding a child with cakes. Erasmus tells of an English gentleman
who tried to teach his son Greek and Latin without punishment. He
taught the boy to use a bow and arrow and set up targets in the shape of
Greek and Latin letters, rewarding each hit with a cherry. He also fed
the boy letters cut from delicious biscuits. Privileges and favors are
often suggested, and the teacher may be personally reinforcing as
friend or entertainer. In industrial education students are paid for
learning. Certain explicitly contrived reinforcers, such as marks,
grades, and diplomas, are characteristic of education as an institution.
(These suggest progress, but like progress they must be made
reinforcing for other reasons.) Prizes are intrinsically reinforcing.
Honors and medals derive their power from prestige or esteem. This
varies between cultures and epochs. In 1876 Oscar Wilde, then 22
years old and halfway toward his B. A. at Oxford, got a “first in
Mods.” He wrote to a friend (64): “… I did not know what I had got till
the next morning at 12 o’clock, breakfasting at the Mitre, I read it in
the Times. Altogether I swaggered horribly but am really pleased with
myself. My poor mother is in great delight, and I was overwhelmed
with telegrams on Thursday from everyone I knew.” The contemporary
student graduating summa cum laude is less widely acclaimed.
Although free of some of the by-products of aversive control,
positive reinforcers of this sort are not without their problems. Many
are effective only in certain states of deprivation which are not always
easily arranged. Making a student hungry in order to reinforce him with

food would raise personal issues which are not entirely avoided with
other kinds of reinforcers. We cannot all get prizes, and if some
students are to get high grades, others must get low.
But the main problem again is the contingencies. Much of what the
child is to do in school does not have the form of play, with its
naturally reinforcing consequences, nor is there any natural connection
with food or a passing grade or a medal. Such contingencies must be
arranged by the teacher, and the arrangement is often defective. The
boy mentioned by Erasmus may have salivated slightly upon seeing a
Greek or Latin text and he was probably a better archer, but his
knowledge of Greek and Latin could not have been appreciably
improved. Grades are almost always given long after the student has
stopped behaving as a student. We must know that such contingencies
are weak because we would never use them to shape skilled behavior.
In industrial education pay is usually by the hour—in other words,
contingent mainly on being present. Scholarships are contingent on a
general level of performance. All these contingencies could no doubt
be improved, but there is probably good reason why they remain
defective.
Personal reinforcers, both positive and negative, raise special
problems. When we speak of attention, approval, friendship, or
affection, we mean more specifically the behavior of the teacher as he
looks at the student, calls on him, talks to him, smiles at him, says
“Right” or “Good,” eases his lot, caresses him, and so on. On the
negative side, we mean ignoring the student, frowning at him, saying
“Wrong” or “Bad,” making things hard for him, punishing him, and so
on. Events of this sort are positively or negatively reinforcing quite
apart from any connection they may have with promotion or prestige.
They are no doubt highly important. When students suggest ways of
improving education, they frequently ask for more personal contact
with their teachers. A common objection to teaching machines is that
they lack the personal touch—even when, as one computer is said to
do, they speak to the child in a “friendly recorded voice.”
The very power of personal reinforcers causes trouble. Personal
involvements may be serious. In the masculine culture of the Greek
Academy, the problem was pederasty. As Marrou (28) has put it,
Socrates attracted the “flower of Athenian youth and bound them to
him with the ties of amorous passion.” Relations between teacher and
student show a greater variety today, but they are possibly just as
troublesome. The sadistic teacher is equally celebrated. Even the milder

versions of personal contact raise problems. The student’s need for
approval must be appreciable but not desperate; censure must build just
the right shade of guilt. Personal reinforcers are readily available, and it
is tempting to overuse them. As in the neo-Freudian design of the
family, the social and personal environment is enlarged beyond all
reason, and unnecessary problems are created. There is nothing
personal about mathematics or about learning to read, even though one
always reads what a person has written. To add personal reinforcers in
an effort to facilitate teaching can be a dangerous strategy. Dr. George
D. Stoddard (57) is quoted as saying that “Perhaps a live teacher who
infuriates a student is better than a machine that leaves him stuffed with
information but cold as a mackerel.” Fortunately, these are not the only
alternatives.
Personal involvements apart, the contingencies are bad. Many things
attract a teacher’s attention, and the careless teacher will reinforce the
attention-getter and the show-off. Many things please a teacher, from a
polished apple to fulsome footnotes in a thesis, and the careless teacher
will reinforce fawners and flatterers. Identification with the teacher is
often held to be essential, but imitation and emulation may yield
undesirable mannerisms and traits. As we shall see in Chapter 11, it is
not easy for the teacher to evaluate the effects of contingencies and
thus guard against shortcomings. Personal contingencies are unstable;
the teacher may withhold approval to spur the student on to greater
efforts but then approve too quickly when he shows extinction
(“discouragement”). He may withhold help in order to give the student
as much credit as possible but then give too much help to avoid
embarrassing him. Students commonly complain of favoritism and
hostility, and not always without justification. As Ben Jonson said,
“Princes learn no art truly, but the art of horsemanship. The reason is,
the brave beast is no flatterer. He will throw a prince as soon as his
groom.” A horse maintains the same contingencies for all men.

NATURAL REINFORCERS
The difficulties inherent in contrived contingencies have drawn
attention to natural reinforcers. Rousseau explained in detail how they
might be used (39). Away with man-made punishment and—and this
was Rousseau’s special contribution—away with man-made rewards!
Man is naturally happy and good; it is society which corrupts and

makes him miserable; let him therefore be taught by nature. Make the
student independent of men; teach him dependence on things. Use only
those forms of coercion or punishment which arise naturally from his
behavior; if he breaks a window, do not repair it, but let him experience
a cold room. Use only natural rewards. Social reinforcers cannot be
neglected, alas, but they can at least be genuine.
Rousseau soon had disciples, but a century and a half were to pass
before John Dewey put similar ideas into widespread practice. Dewey
showed how the child can be brought into contact with the world he is
to learn about—a world which he will explore, discover, observe, and
remember because it is attractive, intriguing, and naturally rewarding
and punishing. Let him learn in school as he learns in his daily life.
Not all natural reinforcers are useful. Most of those having obvious
biological significance, like food and injury, are not naturally
contingent on the behavior in a standard curriculum. Fortunately,
however, the human organism seems to be reinforced by other kinds of
effects. A baby shakes a rattle, a child runs with a pinwheel, a scientist
operates a cyclotron—and all are reinforced by the results. We are
reinforced when a piece of string becomes untangled, when a strange
object is identified, when a sentence we are reading makes sense. It is
well for the human race that this should be so and fortunate for the
teacher. Nevertheless, there are problems. The teacher who uses natural
contingencies of reinforcement really abandons his role as teacher. He
has only to expose the student to an environment; the environment will
do the teaching. It was not for nothing that Rousseau spoke of negative
education.
In practice, much remains for the teacher to do. The sheer logistics
of natural reinforcers is a problem. The real world is too big to be
brought into the classroom, and the teacher must exercise selection.
Moreover, as we have repeatedly seen, the student does not learn just
from being brought into contact with things. Experience, in the sense of
contact, is not only not the best teacher, it is no teacher at all. The
joyous, rapid, and seemingly permanent learning in daily life which
teachers view so enviously depends upon deprivations and aversive
stimuli which are greatly attenuated or lacking in a classroom. Very
little real life goes on in the real world of the school. Heroic measures
on the part of the teacher are needed to make that world important.
Natural contingencies of reinforcement, moreover, are not actually
very good. They are more likely to generate idleness than industry.
Trivial, useless, exhausting, and harmful behaviors are learned in the

real world. The human organism pays for its great speed in learning by
being susceptible to accidental contingencies which breed superstitions.
Many natural reinforcers are too long deferred to be effective. No child
really learns to plant seed because he is reinforced by the resulting
harvest, or to read because he then enjoys interesting books, or to write
because he then passes notes to his neighbor, or not to break windows
because the room would then grow cold. The behavior which satisfies
these terminal contingencies is not taught by the contingencies
themselves, and programs are by no means always naturally available.
The deferred consequences of precurrent responses of self-management
(Chapter 6) are particularly unlikely to shape the behavior they
eventually sustain. For example, natural consequences seldom if ever
induce a student to study, either in nature or in school.
The human race has been exposed to the real world for hundreds of
thousands of years; only very slowly has it acquired a repertoire which
is effective in dealing with that world. Every step in that slow advance
must have been the result of fortunate contingencies, accidentally
programmed. Education is designed to make such accidents
unnecessary. It is quite unlikely that anyone alive today has discovered
agriculture or the controlled use of fire for himself. He has learned
these things through instructional contingencies in which natural
reinforcers play only a minor role. The natural contingencies used in
education must almost always be rigged.

IMPROVING CONTINGENCIES
In practice, a commitment to real life has sometimes led to
improvements. As we have seen, verbal behavior is frequently
overemphasized because it is easily imported into the classroom, and a
shift to nonverbal knowledge, where natural contingencies are more
effective, has been worthwhile. But verbal instruction is not wrong
because it is not real (or because it is not naturally interesting, for it
may be fascinating, as any mathematician knows). The important
distinction is not between nature and artificiality. The teacher is free to
use any available reinforcer provided there are no harmful by-products
and provided the resulting behavior can eventually be taken over by
reinforcers the student will encounter in his daily life. Compared with
governmental and economic agencies, the teacher does not have a wide
choice. Like the psychotherapist, he usually works with weak variables.

But it is not the reinforcers which count, so much as their relation to
behavior. In improving teaching it is less important to find new
reinforcers than to design better contingencies using those already
available.
Immediate and consistent reinforcement is, of course, desirable, but
this is not to deny the importance of intermittent or remote reinforcers.
Men sometimes work toward distant goals. In a very real sense they
plant in the spring because of the harvest in the autumn and study for
years for the sake of a professional career. But they do all this not
because they are affected by distant and future events but because their
culture has constructed mediating devices in the form of conditioned
reinforcers: the student studies because he is admired for doing so,
because immediate changes in his behavior mark progress toward later
reinforcement, because being educated is “a good thing,” because he is
released from the aversive condition of not-knowing. Cultures are
never particularly successful in building reinforcers of this sort; hence
the importance of a direct attack on the problem in a technology of
teaching.
The student who knows how to study knows how to amplify
immediate consequences so that they prove reinforcing. He not only
knows, he knows that he knows and is reinforced accordingly. The
transition from external reinforcement to the self-generated
reinforcement of knowing one knows is often badly handled. In a small
class the precurrent behavior of listening, reading, solving problems,
and composing sentences is reinforced frequently and almost
immediately, but in a large lecture course the consequences are
infrequent and deferred. If mediating devices have not been set up, if
the student is not automatically reinforced for knowing that he knows,
he then stops working, and the aversive by-products of not-knowing
pile up.
Programmed instruction is primarily a scheme for making an
effective use of reinforcers, not only in shaping new kinds of behavior
but in maintaining behavior in strength. A program does not specify a
particular kind of reinforcer (the student may work under aversive
control or for money, food, prestige, or love), but it is designed to make
weak reinforcers or small measures of strong ones effective.
Being right is an example. The teacher’s “Right!” derives its
reinforcing power from positive or negative reinforcers under the
teacher’s control. Being right in responding to a program may be
reinforcing for similar reasons, but it is likely to share some of the

automatic reinforcing effects of “coming out right.” A person working
a crossword puzzle is reinforced when a response completes a part of
the puzzle or supplies material which makes it possible to complete
other parts. When we recall a poem, we are reinforced when a word
scans or rhymes, even when we have not recalled the right word. A
child who is learning to read is reinforced when his vocal responses to
a text compose familiar verbal stimuli. The student who is paying
attention to a lecture or a text is reinforced when the words he hears or
sees correspond to responses he has anticipated—an important
ingredient in listening or reading with “understanding” (47). Being
right also means progress, and the physical structure of a program
usually makes progress conspicuous. In working through a program, a
student knows where he stands; in working through a standard text, he
must wait to have his achievement evaluated by an impending test.
Some familiar features which are often cited in characterizing a
program are really concerned with maximizing the effects of
reinforcers. Steps are small—so that reinforcement is immediate. When
a sustained passage must be read before a response is made and found
to be right, the reinforcement is not sharply contingent upon stimuli
provided by the early parts of the passage, and responses to early parts
are not strongly reinforced. Errors are minimized—and the number of
responses which are automatically reinforced as right is maximized. It
is sometimes said that it is reinforcing to be right only when one is
often wrong, but that depends on the source of reinforcing power. If
being right derives its effectiveness from an unconditioned reinforcer
which is subject to satiation, satiation may occur. Intermittent
reinforcement, as we shall see in a moment, can sometimes solve that
problem. If being right is reinforcing as a release from threat,
occasional instances of being wrong may be needed to sustain the
threat. But the reinforcements inherent in coming out right and in
moving on to later stages in a program are not likely to satiate. On the
contrary, progress may be even more reinforcing as the end of a
program approaches. Being right may not be very reinforcing if the
writer, in an effort to maximize correct responses, has made items too
easy. Such programs are often called boring, but only if other
contingencies are in force. When a program is not reinforcing, the
student simply stops responding. If he continues working because other
contingencies, probably aversive, are in force, he may justly complain
of being bored.
Frequent reinforcement raises another problem if it reduces the

teacher’s reinforcing power. Money, food, grades, and honors must be
husbanded carefully, but the automatic reinforcements of being right
and moving forward are inexhaustible.

“STRETCHING THE RATIO”
Other issues are raised by the size of steps to be taken by the student.
In shaping the behavior of a pigeon, as in the demonstration described
in Chapter 4, success depends on how the requirements for
reinforcement are set. If you do not demand much change at each step,
you will reinforce often, but your subject will progress slowly. If you
demand too much, no response may satisfy, and the behavior generated
up to that point will be extinguished. In deciding what behavior to
reinforce at any given time, the basic rule is “Don’t lose your pigeon!”
How much change in behavior is demanded of the student at each step
in a program must also be weighed against the need to maintain the
behavior in strength.
It is easy to “lose your pigeon” in a kind of programming described
in Chapter 4. The student will be less dependent on immediate and
consistent reinforcement if he is brought under the control of
intermittent reinforcement. If the proportion of responses reinforced
(on a fixed or variable ratio schedule) is steadily reduced, a stage may
be reached at which behavior is maintained indefinitely by an
astonishingly small number of reinforcements. The teacher’s
assignment is to make relatively infrequent reinforcements effective.
One technique is to “stretch the ratio”—that is, to increase the number
of responses per reinforcement as rapidly as the behavior of the student
permits.
In setting up new forms of behavior every change in topography or
stimulus control requires reinforcement, and intermittent reinforcement
is not appropriate. But much of the behavior of the student, particularly
the precurrent behaviors of self-management examined in Chapter 6, is
repeated many times without substantial change and is normally
maintained by intermittent reinforcement. A very simple example of
precurrent behavior is going to school. It is intermittently reinforced, as
we have seen, by many things—attractive architecture, personal
contacts, enjoyable activities, interesting books and materials, pleasant
teachers, and successful achievements. (A small reinforcer can
sometimes make a great difference. In an experiment designed to see

whether orange juice given to grade-school students improved their
health (10), it was found that students receiving orange juice every day
were less often absent. Absence was to be taken as an indication of ill
health, but a closer analysis showed that the difference was accounted
for by students who returned for Friday afternoon classes. They were
returning because of the orange juice.) Once in school students will be
more inclined to start working and continue working if instructional
materials are reinforcing. Audio-visual devices may have this effect
quite apart from whether they teach in other ways. The effect is often
intermittent.
Other precurrent behaviors of self-management are almost always
intermittently reinforced. Careful attention to detail does not guarantee
successful behavior but is occasionally reinforced when behavior is
successful. Memorizing material is occasionally reinforced by
successful recall. Techniques of exploration, discovery (including the
discovery of what one has to say), and problem solving are reinforced
only infrequently, a fact which may explain the popularity of the
concept of trial-and-error.
Reinforcers which require a teacher may be used more effectively by
making them intermittent. Comments on a paper in composition are
poorly contingent on the behavior of writing the paper. As reinforcers
they are likely to be weak and imprecise, particularly when a large
number of papers must be read. The important reinforcers are largely
automatic: a sentence comes out right, it says something interesting, it
fits another sentence. If these automatic reinforcers are powerful
enough, the student may continue to write and improve his writing
even though he receives few if any comments. But comments by the
teacher can also reinforce, and the reinforcement can be intermittent.
Lindsley (25) has worked out a technique for the intermittent grading
of compositions.

THE HARD-WORKING STUDENT
The diligent and eager student comes to class, studies for long
periods of time, enters into discussions with his teachers and other
students, and is not distracted by extraneous reinforcers. He does all
this, not because he possesses the trait of industry or has a positive
attitude toward his education, but because he has been exposed to
effective contingencies of reinforcement. Almost inevitably he will be

called hard-working and said to be doing only what all students ought
to do. The implication is that he is under aversive control. Since a
threat of aversive treatment makes a student diligent, students who are
diligent must be working under a threat.
It is true that studying often has aversive consequences. Prolonged
attention is a strain, sustained effort is tiring and even punishing, and
the dedicated student forgoes other reinforcers. It is easy to believe that
these aversive consequences are taken in order to avoid the greater
punishment of failure. But under a favorable program of intermittent
reinforcement, the student will continue to work hard even though his
behavior generates aversive stimuli. A pigeon reinforced on a high ratio
will stop the experiment if it can—for example, by pecking a second
key which turns the apparatus off—but when properly programmed it
will not stop the experiment by stopping work. Nor will a student.
If by “work” we mean behavior which has aversive consequences,
then the diligent student works, but if we mean behavior under aversive
control, then he is not necessarily working at all. The distinction is not
easily made by opposing “work” to “play,” because play also has two
meanings: it may be behavior which does not generate punishing
consequences (the dilettante plays at being a scientist) or behavior
primarily under the control of positive reinforcement (football players
play hard and dangerously). Even a distinction between “hard” and
“easy” is misleading. A. N. Whitehead (63) said that “an easy book
ought to be burned for it cannot be educational.” But did he mean a
book so well written or programmed that a student reads it without
being forced to do so or a book which can be read without strain or
fatigue?
The behavior generated by an effective program of intermittent
reinforcement is hard to characterize in traditional terms. The central
theme of a project on teaching arithmetic has been expressed as
follows: “The study of mathematics should be an adventure, requiring
and deserving hard work” (32). The project is designed to generate a
high level of activity without recourse to aversive contingencies. The
appearance of terms like “requiring,” “deserving,” “hard,” and “work”
is an illuminating commentary on the history of education.
Well-designed contingencies of reinforcement will keep the student
busily at work, free of the by-products of aversive control. Even more
dramatic achievements are possible with respect to behavior which
would traditionally be said to show (1) interest or enthusiasm, (2) the
appreciation and enjoyment of works of art, literature, and music, and

(3) dedication. Programmed schedules in which the ratio has been
stretched are again involved.
The issue is important both while the student is being educated and
afterwards. The teacher may count himself successful when his
students become engrossed in his field, study conscientiously, and do
more than is required of them, but the important thing is what they do
when they are no longer being taught. We take this into account when
we insist that what the student learns should be appropriate to day-today living, but a student who learns to behave in given ways under
aversive control may stop behaving as soon as the aversive control
ceases, no matter how appropriate the topography of the behavior may
be. The student who has been made to practice may never touch the
piano again when aversive contingencies come to an end, in spite of the
fact that there are good reasons for playing the piano. Natural
reinforcers may not automatically replace the contrived positive
reinforcers of the classroom. The teacher’s approval and praise and
even the intellectual excitement of the classroom may have no real life
counterparts. Former students often return to an instructional
environment when the contingencies in their daily lives do not support
behavior formerly exhibited in school or college.
The teacher can make it more probable that the behavior he sets up
will continue in strength if he carefully stretches the ratio. Consider, for
example, teaching enjoyment and appreciation. We want students to
like books, art, and music—that is to say, we want them to read, look,
and listen, and continue to do so, and enable themselves to do so by
buying or borrowing books, going to museums and concerts, and so on.
In particular, we want them to do all this with respect to good books,
good music, and good art. This is a particularly important educational
assignment in a culture which provides more and more leisure time.
Topography of behavior is not at issue. The student already knows
how to read, look, or listen; he is to do so for particular reasons. We
therefore arrange for him to be reinforced as he reads books, looks at
pictures, or listens to music. This is not easy. It is not enough to expose
him to books, pictures, and music if little or no reinforcement takes
place. The exposure is often indirect: the student is studying the history
of a field, or its technical problems, or the reasons why objects in the
field are or should be enjoyed. The instructor often tries to make things
reinforcing by exhibiting his own enthusiasm for them. Again, the
problem is not to find more powerful reinforcers but to arrange better
contingencies. Intermittent reinforcement and programs which stretch

the ratio are important.
How, for example, can we produce a student who “reads good
books”? It is the schedule rather than the absolute magnitude of
reinforcement which must be considered. People read and continue to
read cartoons, comics, and short items where the reinforcement, though
not great, is contingent on very little actual reading. Primers and early
textbooks follow the same principle; something happens as each
sentence is read. The variable ratio is of modest size. This is light
reading, and many readers never go beyond it.
In “good” books, almost by definition, reinforcers are dispersed.
Students usually read such books only because they are required to do
so. They “work” at them, and that is scarcely the goal in teaching
appreciation. They can be induced to read for pleasure even though
reinforcement is infrequent if the change in schedule is properly
programmed. A student who has access to a variety of materials will to
some extent automatically program a stretching ratio. He will continue
to read only those books he is able to sustain. Courses in literature
usually make little provision for this natural adjustment. On the
contrary, under aversive control the student reads books which do not
reinforce him often enough to build up behavior which will be
sustained by large ratios.
It is hard to design a sequence of materials in which the student
advances to higher ratios only when he can sustain them. With or
without aversive contingencies, it is easy to “lose our pigeon,” and the
student never becomes a reader. The true devote is usually an accident;
a fortunate sequence of contingencies builds up a strong disposition to
continue to read even when reinforcers are rare. Many forces oppose
the explicit design of such contingencies. On the one hand, it is
tempting to use a reinforcer as soon as it becomes available (to give the
student at once something he may find reinforcing) rather than
withhold it for intermittent scheduling. On the other hand, parents,
accrediting agencies, teachers, and others, judge a school or college by
the difficulty of the books students are reading, and teachers are
therefore reinforced for advancing too rapidly to large ratios.
Books which are good because they are only intermittently
reinforcing are a natural product of the art of literature. A great moment
is effective only if the reader has been prepared for it. One cannot
enjoy a book by skipping from one great passage to another. The
necessary intervening material, however, is usually not strongly
reinforcing. Thus, the resolution of suspense or puzzlement is

reinforcing only if the suspense or puzzlement has prevailed for some
time (when it may well have been slightly aversive). Few students ever
acquire the sustained behavior which brings the occasional great
reinforcements of literature within reach. Similarly, in the appreciation
of art and music, students soon learn to enjoy things which are
consistently reinforcing, but they may never go beyond that point. The
rare and particularly powerful reinforcers await those whose behavior
has been built up by, and sustained by, a special schedule.
Possibly even more important than the things students enjoy reading,
looking at, or listening to are the things they enjoy doing. We teach
them to paint, conduct research, raise orchids, and make friends; but if
instruction is to be successful, these repertoires must continue in
strength. We may try to build dedicated behavior by clarifying
reinforcers, by setting the example of an enthusiastic and dedicated
person, by describing our own satisfactions and thrills, or by
commending the student’s industry, but if we do not take scheduling
into account, we may still “lose our pigeon.”
A dedicated person is one who remains active for long periods of
time without reinforcement. He does so because, either in the hands of
a skillful teacher or by accident, he has been exposed to a gradually
lengthening variable-ratio schedule. At first, what he did “paid off”
quickly, but he then moved on to things less readily reinforced. It is
perhaps presumptuous to compare a Faraday, Mozart, Rembrandt, or
Tolstoy with a pigeon pecking a key or with a pathological gambler,
but variable-ratio schedules are nevertheless conspicuous features of
the biographies of scientists, composers, artists, and writers.
Programs which stretch the ratio are most often accidental. A
scientist does an experiment which, because of its nature or the
scientist’s earlier history, quickly turns up interesting results. In
following it up, he moves into a more difficult area, builds more
complex apparatus, and works longer before the next reinforcement.
Eventually he works for months or years between discoveries. Perhaps
in the last decade of his life nothing reinforces him, but he dies a
dedicated man. Accidental programs having such effects are no doubt
rare, but so are the dedicated people whose behavior they are needed to
explain.
A dedicated scientist is more than one who knows his field or how to
use apparatus. To love to make music is more than knowing how to
sing or play an instrument. But education is seldom concerned with the
something more. Effective programs depend upon rather unpredictable

reinforcers, and it is hard to evaluate the strength of the student’s
behavior and hence to know when to enlarge the ratio. Perhaps an
optimal program is always to some extent an accident, but the general
principle of moving from frequent to rare reinforcers is, nevertheless,
important. “Standards” are again troublesome. The teacher finds it hard
to permit the beginning scientist to be reinforced by fortuitous or
irrelevant results, or the beginning artist by cheap or hackneyed effects,
or the young musician by a noisy and inaccurate performance, but
those who move too quickly to rigorous and valid research or flawless
technique and taste may not be on their way to a dedicated life.
As we have seen, the techniques of self-management used in
thinking are very similar to those which another person would use to
bring about the same changes in the thinker’s behavior. Teacher and
student manipulate the same kinds of variables to induce the student to
pay attention, solve problems, have ideas. They may also take the same
steps in solving the problem of motivation. Techniques of self-control
are available in heightening one’s own industry, enjoyment, and
dedication.
Strictly speaking, the student cannot reinforce or punish himself by
withholding positive or negative reinforcers until he has behaved in a
given way, but he can seek out or arrange conditions under which his
behavior is reinforced or punished. Thus, he can choose hobbies or
companions because of the contingencies they provide. He can create
reinforcing events, as by checking an answer to a problem. He can stop
emitting unreinforced responses in an unfavorable situation so that
extinction will not generalize to other situations—for example, he can
learn not to read books which are too hard for him so that his
inclination to read other books will not suffer. He can learn subtle
discriminations which improve the contingencies of reinforcement
when he listens to his own accent in a foreign language. He can clarify
reinforcing consequences—for example, he can mechanically amplify
small movements while learning a response of subtle topography or
make a record of his behavior, as a writer does in counting the number
of words or pages written in a session. If his behavior is strongly
competitive, he can sharpen the contingencies by frequently looking at
the achievements of his rivals. He can manipulate daily routines
involving such things as sleep, diet, and exercise in ways which affect
the strength of the behavior at issue.
He will do all those things only if he has learned to do them. Specific
instruction is particularly important because self-management is often

covert and models are therefore not generally available for imitation.
We do not often see people controlling themselves in these ways.
Moreover, the natural reinforcing consequences are almost always long
deferred. Education has never taught the self-management of
motivation very effectively. It has seldom tried. But techniques become
available as soon as the problem is understood.
The abulia of those who have nothing to do, who are not interested
in anything, is one of the great tragedies of modern life. It is sometimes
attributed to alienation, anomie, anhedonia, rootlessness, or lack of
values. These are not the causes of anything; at best they are other
products of the defective contingencies which are the source of the
trouble attributed to them. Through a proper understanding of
contingencies of reinforcement, we should be able to make students
eager and diligent and be reasonably sure that they will continue to
enjoy the things we teach them for the rest of their lives.

8

THE CREATIVE STUDENT
The growing power of a technology of teaching seems to threaten the
individual student. In the first place, it has led to the design of methods
of instruction which can be used with large numbers of students but
which are, in the process, likely to ignore individual interests, talents,
and aspirations. The danger is that mass techniques will make students
all alike. Regimentation seems inevitable. As we have seen (page 90)
current educational policies, with their syllabuses and requirements,
suggest regimentation, but we do not fear this because we know that
students will not meet requirements or conform to the specifications of
a syllabus under existing methods. Effective teaching is another matter.
It calls for a reconsideration of policy.
In the second place, a powerful technology of teaching seems to
deprive the student of any credit for learning (page 141). But it is not
just a matter of credit. Is the student indeed simply a product of an
environmental history to which education makes a more and more
effective contribution? Such an environment is designed because its
effects on the student can be predicted; is there then no room for the
unforeseen? The environment is designed to control the behavior of the
Student; is there then no room for the uncontrolled—the original or
creative? The issue is often stated in terms of traits of character, such as
“freedom of the mind,” “an inquiring spirit,” or “creativity.” Since
traits of this sort are distinguished by their introspective inscrutability,
it is not too difficult to dismiss them from a serious analysis. We gain
nothing in asserting that a student behaves creatively because he
possesses something called creativity. Perhaps we can measure the
trait, compare people with respect to it, and test for the presence of
associated traits, but we cannot change creativity itself. Those who take
this approach are reduced to selection rather than teaching—for
example, to talent searches intended to give creative students a chance
to develop their special ability. If we are to design effective ways of
furthering the behavior said to show creativity, we must trace it to
manipulable variables.
A technology based on a deterministic science of human behavior
may seem particularly unsuited to such a task. Teaching, as the
arrangement of contingencies of reinforcement which control the
student’s behavior, appears to be by its very nature inimical to freedom,

inquiry, and originality. Mental or cognitive theories seem to have the
advantage because no matter how deterministic they may claim to be,
they can usually find room for caprice or spontaneity among the inner
determiners. There is no comparable freedom in the external variables,
and it is easy to conclude that a technology of teaching based on an
experimental analysis of such variables must confine itself to a rather
mechanical transmission of standard material.
There is nothing in a deterministic position, however, which
questions a man’s absolute uniqueness. Every human being is the
product of a genetic endowment and an environmental history which
are peculiarly his own. Education could conceivably add a common
overriding environmental history which would make students very
much alike, but it need not do so. We shall see that what passes for
freedom and originality can also be respected.
Determinism is a useful assumption because it encourages a search
for causes. A man who believes that the volume of a gas changes
capriciously will not look for the cause of every change he observes
and will be less likely to discover the laws which govern volume. He is
also not likely to learn how to change the volume. The teacher who
believes that a student creates a work of art by exercising some inner,
capricious faculty will not look for the conditions under which he does
in fact do creative work. He will be also less able to explain such work
when it occurs and less likely to induce students to behave creatively.
In what ways should behavior be free, original, and creative? Not all
idiosyncrasies are useful. The delusions of a psychotic have
individuality, but we do not envy it; a nightmare is possibly as creative
as a poem or a painting; eccentrics and rebels are not always valuable
to themselves or others; all cultures punish deviant behavior. To be
merely different is not necessarily worthwhile. Where are we to find
the “values” which dictate the extent to which education is to
encourage freedom and originality?
This is really a question about educational policy, which will be
discussed in Chapter 11. A culture must remain reasonably stable, but it
must also change if it is to increase its chances of survival. The
“mutations” which account for its evolution are the novelties, the
innovations, the idiosyncracies which arise in the behavior of
individuals. They are not all useful; in fact, many of them, in the form
of superstitions and neuroses, for example, are harmful. But some
prove valuable and are selected by the culture. Valuable and harmful
alike, innovations are demanded by the process of selection. We may

therefore accept the general assumption of those who champion
freedom, inquiry, and creative action that so long as obviously
dangerous and harmful variations can be avoided or dealt with,
anything which encourages individuality is probably a move in the
right direction.

FREEDOM
Education has always played an important role in furthering freedom
from want, fear, tyranny, and dependence on others, and there is no
reason why it cannot play this role more effectively as it becomes more
powerful and reaches more people. Through behavioral processes
which are now well understood, men struggle to free themselves from
aversive stimulation. A man is not free who spends all his time
avoiding famine, pestilence, danger, and strong personal or institutional
control. Education furthers freedom in this sense in two ways. It helps
to develop the technology which reduces aversive features of the
environment. Physical technology has built a world in which men
spend very little time escaping from natural aversive stimuli, and
cultural technology has freed men from many aversive techniques in
economics, government, religion, and elsewhere. Education furthers
freedom in a second way by teaching techniques of self-management
which permit men to deal effectively with any aversive features of the
environment which may survive. Some cultures do this by teaching
submission and acceptance, others by teaching active change or revolt.
Men also struggle, and usually less successfully, to free themselves
from the ultimate aversive consequences of positive reinforcement. No
one forces the compulsive gambler to gamble, but he is nonetheless not
free. Nor are men free when they are under the control of euphoriant
drugs, flattery, or certain kinds of incentive wages or sales practices.
Neither the scientist nor the artist is free whose work is strongly
affected by financial success or professional acclaim. Again, education
can help in two ways. It can promote a behavioral technology capable
of correcting troublesome contingencies, and it can teach precurrent
behaviors of self-management which permit a man to escape from
positive contingencies in which ultimate consequences are aversive.
Education can free the student by changing its own practices. It can
minimize aversive techniques in classroom management, as we saw in
Chapter 5, and it can arrange positive contingencies which have no

objectionable by-products. It can protect the individuality of a young
artist by making sure that his behavior is shaped by idiosyncratic selfreinforcement rather than by the attention, approval, or admiration of a
well-meaning teacher who finds other characteristics of his work
interesting or admirable. A “liberal education” frees the student by
permitting him to pursue his studies under minimal control of practical
consequences. All these goals are more likely to be reached with the
help of a powerful technology of teaching.
Another kind of freedom comes from self-reliance. The student who
can do things for himself is independent of others, and the larger and
more effective his repertoire, the freer he is. A powerful technology
will extend this kind of freedom. But self-reliance is not only a matter
of competence. A man who can execute behavior adequately is still not
free if he must be told what to do and when to do it. To be free of
personal direction he must be “dependent on things.” A child who
succeeds in getting off to school on time only when his parents
repeatedly say, “It’s time to go,” or “Hurry up or you’ll miss the bus,”
is not free. He is self-reliant only when he has come under the control
of clocks, calendars, and other stimuli associated with the passage of
time. It is hard for his parents to free him from a dependence on verbal
stimuli because on any one occasion getting him off to school is
usually more important than teaching him to be prompt.
As we shall see in Chapter 10, an important feature of programmed
instruction is concerned with advancing the student’s freedom by
making a rather similar change in controlling stimuli. The first step in
teaching the student to behave in a given way is usually to let him
imitate a teacher or follow instructions. He has not learned to behave
that way until his behavior has been brought under other kinds of
stimulus control. In reading a text, for example, his verbal behavior
may be topographically correct, but he does not know what he is saying
until the control exerted by the text can be withdrawn.
Self-reliance is also at issue when education is designed so that the
student will be able to use what he learns when he moves on to
noneducational environments. It is also the issue in efforts to avoid
purely verbal instruction. The student of physics, like the physicist
himself, is to be controlled so far as possible by the world of things,
rather than by what others have said about that world.
In none of these senses is a free, self-reliant student threatened by
better teaching or by techniques which reach large numbers of students.
On the contrary, it is only a powerful technology which will permit us

to see the danger to freedom in older forms of instruction and to design
better forms.

ORIGINALITY
Teaching too well may also seem to threaten individuality by
restricting original behavior. We prepare the student for the world he is
to meet by building an extensive repertoire, and the more powerful our
technology, the bigger that repertoire presumably will be. It will not be
very original. But the student can never be completely prepared in this
way, and so we also teach him to explore novel environments and solve
the problems they present, as we saw in Chapter 6. He is then more
likely to seem original in the sense that his behavior cannot easily be
traced to prior instruction, particularly when it depends upon
unforeseen features of a novel environment. Teachers have, as we have
seen, tried to further originality in this sense by minimizing the
transmission of what is already known. But the student will be most
likely to solve the problems presented by a novel environment if he
knows as much as possible about earlier solutions. He must have some
behavior “to think with.” There is no danger that teaching facts will
overload his mind. Teaching him what others have discovered will
conflict with teaching him how to discover for himself only with
respect to instructional time and effort, a conflict which a powerful
technology should resolve.
The condition of the transmitted behavior needs to be examined. In a
sense the student may know what he knows too well. He will not
generalize readily if the topography of his behavior is sharply defined
or if specific stimuli are in control. A poet is more likely to use
metaphors and engage in other forms of verbal play if he has a large
vocabulary, but the words in that vocabulary must not be too rigidly
tied to specific occasions. Scientists define their terms as precisely as
possible, and poetic metaphors are not often found in their technical
publications, but a great deal of scientific thinking is nevertheless
metaphorical in the sense that expressions learned in one situation are
generalized to others, and this will not occur if terms are strictly
controlled. The historical analogies which play so prominent a role in
governmental policies are plausible only if epochs being compared are
not seen too clearly.
How well should a student understand what he reads? For some

purposes, such as arguing with the author or criticizing him fairly, a
thorough understanding seems essential. But other purposes make other
demands. Outright memorizing of a literary classic, as in early Greek
and Chinese education, is not likely to build behavior which is easily
transferred to new situations. Understanding what one reads as
thoroughly as possible approaches word-by-word recitation. Complete
misunderstanding, as by reading one’s own behavior into the author’s,
is perhaps more likely to make for originality, but a middle course
seems desirable.
The problem of making transmitted knowledge as useful as possible
has never been examined in its true light because it has been solved,
inadvertently and incompletely, in a curious way. We have seen that
bad teaching has at least the merit of permitting the student to learn
how to learn, and we may now add that it has possibly unexpected
advantages in preparing him for novel environments. By assigning
more than our students can possibly read with care and particularly by
failing to program effectively, we avoid any danger of a too rigid
repertoire. The student skims, and the use he makes of what he reads
will show perhaps as much of his own history as of the author’s. A
more reasonable alternative would be to find out what the student
learns when he skims a book and to teach it in other ways. It would
probably mean assigning fewer books or books of a different kind.
The proposal conflicts with the traditional premium on accuracy.
The teacher is most likely to be reinforced if his students correctly
recite poems, give dates, reconstruct tables, and paraphrase lectures and
books. The highest grades go to those who correctly answer the most
questions. Almost all educational measurement emphasizes accuracy.
But, as we shall see in Chapter 11, the most easily measured products
of education are not necessarily the most valuable. This is particularly
true with respect to individuality. We need not make bad teaching a
standard policy; we can discover what has been usefully learned and
teach it—well.
Another characteristic of a useful repertoire is a familiar issue in the
field of programmed instruction. Many critics complain of redundancy
when a program induces a student to state a fact or proposition in
several different ways. A student who emits or assents to the statement
“Columbus discovered America” is assumed to know that America was
discovered by Columbus. And of course he does. But that is not always
the case. Alternative versions of complex facts and propositions do not
appear in the student’s behavior spontaneously. If, when he has learned

one statement, he is able to make another, it is not because the two are
connected by the common proposition which they express, but because
he has translated one into the other. Translational repertoires are
acquired very early. We use them constantly in impromptu speech,
when we cast sentences in convenient grammatical form. Other
repertoires are quite complex. Mathematics, for example, is concerned
with many translational repertoires which establish the far from
obvious equivalences of propositions. A student who has learned a fact
in only one form may not readily respond to a novel situation in
another form even though he could, if a more explicit occasion arose,
translate one form into the other. By teaching the student to state a fact
or proposition in several ways, a good program prepares him to use his
knowledge most effectively.
Another practice, which is likely to be viewed with as much
suspicion as undermining accuracy, is designed to break down the
definition of verbal operants. A few programs have been constructed to
destroy some of the control exercised by context. One set of frames is
concerned with the names of containers. The child is asked to complete
sentences of the following sort, presented by a machine which covers
adjacent sentences: Milk comes in a paper carton or a glass ____.
Shoes come in a bottle called a____. Toothpaste comes in a
squeezable box called a ____. We drink coffee from a tube called
a______. And so on. In each case the child must respond with the name
of a container appropriate to the thing contained, while equating it with
a rather farfetched synonym. The program is designed not to induce a
child to call a coffee cup a tube, but rather to encourage the extension
of verbal responses to new and unfamiliar stimuli.
We can teach the student to think for himself without sacrificing the
advantages of knowing what others have thought. He will not waste
time in discovering what is already known, but what is known must be
transmitted in a form he is most likely to use—particularly in those
unforeseeable environments in which his contribution as an individual
will be most conspicuous.

SELF-MANAGEMENT AND ORIGINALITY
Several techniques of self-management, similar to those mentioned
in Chapter 6, further individuality by generating behavior which does
not resemble the behavior of a teacher. When we teach a student how

to study, for example, we do not know what he is going to learn. Books
may or may not further individuality, as we have seen, but the study of
nature guarantees originality which arises from “a dependence on
things.” Behavior acquired through contact with things is original in
two senses: it has not been acquired from other people, and it will show
the novelty and variety of things.
A child who is curious about the world around him seems
particularly to be expressing himself as an individual. He can scarcely
have been influenced by the things he is curious about; and being
curious does not seem to be anything he has learned. This is sometimes
true. By turning his eyes toward the source of a noise, for example, a
child increases his chances of receiving possibly important visual
stimulation. The response has obvious survival value and is evidently
part of the child’s genetic endowment. Behavior having a similar result
can also be conditioned, although appropriate contingencies are often
overlooked and instructional contingencies seldom arranged—possibly
just because the behavior suggests an inner origination. Thus, a parent
who buys his child a new toy will almost always show the child how it
works. If it is a noisemaker, he will use it to make a noise; if it requires
an unusual mode of operation, he will demonstrate. Excellent
contingencies which would shape and maintain such behavior as
reaching toward and grasping a novel object, shaking it, and twisting it
are thus destroyed. Similarly, laboratory courses in science are seldom
designed to protect or strengthen the contingencies responsible for
curiosity.
Physical objects are not, of course, the only things students can be
taught to explore. Behaviors analogous to reaching, grasping, pushing,
and pulling are to be found in the permutations and combinations of
symbols, words, musical notations, elements of plastic art, numbers,
physical constants, scientific laws, and so on. Exploratory behavior is
particularly likely to take idiosyncratic forms when it is directed toward
the student himself. There is nothing about such repertoires of selfmanagement which cannot be taught effectively and to large numbers
of students.
It may still be argued that some instances of human behavior cannot
be traced to either genetic endowment or environmental history and
that they are therefore original in a special sense. Certainly new forms
of human behavior have come into existence. Very little of the
extraordinary repertoire of modern man was exhibited by his ancestors,
say, 25,000 years ago. Each of the responses composing that repertoire

must have occurred at least once when it was not being transmitted as
part of a culture. Where could it have come from if not from a creative
mind?
A similar question has had a prominent place in two other scientific
fields. It once seemed necessary to attribute the origin of life to the act
of a creative mind—but it now appears that complex molecules
characteristic of living systems could have arisen from simpler
precursors under plausible conditions. It once seemed necessary to
attribute the extraordinary diversity of living things to a creative mind
—until genetic and evolutionary theories of the origin of species
provided an alternative. It is not surprising that anthropocentric
explanations should be abandoned last of all in accounting for novel
forms of human behavior, but alternative explanations are available.
New responses are generated by accidental arrangements of variables
as unforeseeable as the accidental arrangements of molecules or genes.
Scientific discovery and literary and artistic invention can often be
traced to a kind of fortuitous programming of the necessary
contingencies.
The role of chance may be taken over, and extended, by deliberate
design. Scientists create molecules by arranging conditions which
could conceivably never arise fortuitously; genetic material can be
deliberately altered through measures which do not closely resemble
natural causes of mutations; and new forms of behavior can be
generated by environmental contingencies which would be unlikely to
arise by accident. By definition we cannot teach original behavior,
since it would not be original if taught, but we can teach the student to
arrange environments which maximize the probability that original
responses will occur. He can learn not only to take advantage of
accidents, following Pasteur’s well-known dictum, but to produce
them. He can generate new ideas by, for example, arbitrarily
rearranging words, altering established propositions in mechanical
ways (as by denying self-evident axioms or being, as Goethe put it, der
Geist der stets verneint), or substituting antonyms (as in some verbal
wit). Subtle activities of this sort are probably part of all exploratory
thinking.
The physicists Lee and Yang are said (3) to resort occasionally to the
I Ching, a Chinese system of divination in which the patterns produced
by the fall of a handful of sticks refer the player to certain ambiguous
propositions, the possible relevance of which to a current issue can then
be explored—a technique which is probably all the more effective for

not being taken seriously. Small “accidents” were used by British
designers of military devices in World War II. As Warren Weaver (61)
describes it, “a small vibrating member … kept the whole mechanism
in a constant state of minor but rapid vibration.” The effect, called
“dither,” was essentially random but nonetheless valuable. Weaver has
suggested intellectual parallels. The environment in which one works
generates a certain amount of dither, and fatigue and carelessness
contribute more. The effects are not always beneficial. “I care little for
spelling and punctuation,” said Montaigne. “When the sense is lost, I
am not concerned for at least I have had my say. Only when, as so
often happens, the mistake introduces an erroneous idea am I ruined.”
Is it possible to generate original behavior by reinforcing students
when they behave in original ways or by punishing them when their
behavior is commonplace? Contingencies which appear to have this
effect are not unknown. In solving a problem by trial-and-error, we
often behave in exaggerated or unusual ways; if a key does not turn, we
rattle it, twist it, or move it in other ways which have perhaps never
been reinforced by the response of a lock. We emit disordered, garbled,
solecistic, or nonsensical verbal responses, not only in speaking under
pressure, but when standard responses would not be effective.
Nonverbal behavior is often reinforced just because it is surprising or
odd. When familiar forms of art and music lose their power to
reinforce, new forms are acclaimed just because they are new. In some
cultures eccentric behavior is reinforced as a sign of spiritual
possession or divinity. We arrange instructional contingencies of this
sort when, for example, we commend a student for a paper showing
originality.
But there are theoretical problems. The word “original” does not
describe behavior, it compares it. Contingencies which respect
originality do not strengthen specific topographies. They may,
however, indirectly reinforce techniques of self-management. Amusing
behavior is usually original, but a person who has been reinforced for
being amusing does not then possess strong amusing responses.
(Comedians possess standard repertoires, but they are amusing only to
those who have not already seen or heard them.) A person who tends to
be amusing is marked by a kind of precurrent behavior. The punster,
for example, responds to current verbal behavior in a special way,
covertly emitting intraverbal responses some one of which may prove
to be relevant to another current stimulus, verbal or otherwise. If he is
clever enough, he then constructs a plausible sentence containing that

response in its new relation (47). The nonverbal comedian also makes
people laugh by distorting standard topographies and by responding to
unlikely features of a situation. When we reinforce amusing behavior
we indirectly teach techniques of this sort, but direct instruction is
possible. We can teach punning, as well as more useful examples of
original behavior.
Similar results may be obtained by punishing nonoriginal behavior.
Commonplace responses have many aversive consequences. They are
likely to be emitted even when inappropriate and repeated so often that
they grow dull. The effects are natural negative reinforcers, and they
are contingent on outcome. When we criticize someone for being
unoriginal, we simply extend the natural contingencies. Instruction
directed toward the precurrent behavior of self-management itself
would be more effective.
Sheer quantity of behavior is important. Other things being equal a
culture will be more likely to uncover an original artist if it induces
many people to paint pictures, or to turn up a great composer if it
induces many people to compose. Great chess players tend to come
from cultures which encourage chess playing as great mathematicians
come from those which encourage mathematics. The contingencies of
positive and negative reinforcement which encourage activity in a
given field no doubt yield much mediocre behavior, but mediocrity, as
Diderot (14) said, is valuable just because it gives genius a chance to
discover itself. Sheer quantity of behavior is also important in the
individual. The great Mozart symphonies are a selection from a large
number; the great Picassos are only part of the product of a lifetime of
painting.
A culture maximizes unusual combinations of genetic and
environmental variables by arranging highly reinforcing contingencies.
They cannot closely respect topographies. Negative contingencies are
often suspended. In brainstorming, for example, behavior is reinforced
even though it is illogical, absurd, inaccurate, or ineffective. In
psychoanalysis, the patient is reinforced for talking and possibly
punished for silence, but these consequences are not contingent on
what is said, as the expression “free association” suggests.
Contingencies designed to teach a student to write are also often most
helpful if they primarily respect quantity. The important thing is to
evoke behavior. (Editing is a different part of the creative process.)
Under contingencies which respect quantity, responses are emitted
which would otherwise never appear, and many of them can be traced

to variables which would otherwise never be effective. The behavior is
therefore likely to be original. The motivational techniques discussed in
Chapter 7 are obviously relevant. The poet’s metaphor and the
scientist’s analogy are often farfetched, and how far they are fetched
depends in part on the contingencies of reinforcement which breed
interest, enthusiasm, and dedication. A powerful technology of
teaching can strengthen these sources of originality—in any number of
students.
Other techniques of self-management are also helpful. Unusual
responses emitted for the first time on novel occasions are likely to be
weak. The student will be most original if he knows how to discover
what he has to say. The current inadequacy of this sort of selfmanagement is seen in the bohemianism, artistic temperament, and
fitful inspiration of creative people. It is often supposed that these are
necessary characteristics of creative behavior. By analyzing the sources
of such behavior, however, a technology of teaching may discover
more useful conditions of originality.
Traditional formulations of human behavior not only fail to explain
freedom, individuality, and creativity, they brand them as basically
inexplicable. Free, idiosyncratic, and creative acts are admired, perhaps
in the hope that they will become more common, but when upon
occasion the admiration seems to work, no one knows why. Failure is
expected—and even valued, since success suggests some sort of
infringing influence. Only by defining the behavior we wish to teach
can we begin to search for the conditions of which it is a function and
design effective instruction. The natural ultimate consequences of
original behavior are deferred and often inconspicuous, and instruction
is therefore all the more important. The preceding account contains
nothing relevant to freedom, individuality, or creativity which cannot
be taught effectively and to large numbers of students.

9

DISCIPLINE, ETHICAL BEHAVIOR, AND SELFCONTROL
We have seen how students may be taught to behave in appropriate
ways on appropriate occasions. We must also consider how behavior
may be weakened.

PUNISHMENT
Students act in many ways which are wasteful or dangerous either to
themselves or others, either in their school environments or in everyday
life. They are traditionally dissuaded from doing so through the use of
punishing contingencies in which unwanted behavior is followed by
negative reinforcers. The physical environment exhibits many natural
examples, and arranged contingencies of a similar sort maintain the
social structures of many species. Men may inherit some tendency to
act punitively, but the topography of most human aggression has
obviously been learned. It is often verbal, for example, and when it is
not, it often uses invented weapons. The contingencies, both
phylogenic and ontogenic, are simple enough. When A’s behavior is
aversive to B, B acts in such a way that A’s behavior is weakened—at
least for a while and at least with respect to B. Education seems to
require measures of this sort, both for its own purposes in classroom
and school management and because it shares with ethical, religious,
and governmental agencies the responsibility of making sure that the
student behaves acceptably in the world at large.
Whether maintained by the physical environment, the social
environment, or the teacher, punishing contingencies are no doubt
effective, but their mode of operation is easily misunderstood. Where
positive reinforcement builds up behavior, negative reinforcement
seems to break it down, but the effect is not quite so simple. Suppose
that we observe that a child reaches for the flame of a candle, is burned,
and does not reach again. In what sense has he been taught not to reach
for a flame? One possible result is described by the expression “The
burnt child fears the flame.” Autonomic responses of glands and
smooth muscles have been conditioned, and the child may weep,
blanch, or show an accelerated pulse when he next sees a flame. As
part of this syndrome his exploratory behavior may be weakened: in the

presence of a candle flame he will not be likely to explore any part of
the environment, to reach for or grasp objects of any kind.
Stimuli which acted just before the child was burned should also
have become aversive, and any behavior which brings escape from
them or avoids them will be negatively reinforced. We describe this by
saying, “The burnt child shuns the flame.” He may shut his eyes or turn
his head so that he cannot see the flame, or he may move away from it.
The stimuli most likely to be conditioned in this way are generated by
the movement of the hand in reaching, and the child escapes from them
by pulling his hand away or avoids them by not reaching. Emotional
responses are not necessarily involved: a child may shun a flame which
he does not fear. Both effects extinguish, and the child may eventually
reach toward a flame again. If he is again burned, the cycle is repeated.
On the other hand, the effect may generalize to other stimuli. “A
scalded dog fears cold water.” In a world in which many forms of
behavior are punished a child may become hesitant, timid, or
unresponsive.
In neither case is the probability of the punished act necessarily
reduced, and this possibility must be taken into account. If punishment
works mainly by conditioning aversive stimuli the reduction of which
automatically reinforces incompatible behavior, then alternative
techniques should be considered. By punishing behavior we wish to
suppress, we arrange conditions under which acceptable behavior is
strengthened, but the contingencies do not specify the form of the latter
behavior. When we punish a student who displeases us, we do not
specify pleasing behavior. The student learns only indirectly to avoid or
escape our punishment, possibly by acquiring some of the techniques
of self-management discussed in Chapter 6. The contingencies can be
improved by punishing smaller units. We do not teach a child to tie his
shoelace by punishing him for failing to do so, but if we reprimand him
slightly when the lace is taken in the wrong hand, held in the wrong
way, or moved in the wrong direction, a correct topography may be
shaped because incompatible responses can be selected from a narrow
range of possibilities. If the stimuli are mild, unwanted by-products
may be minimized.
To take a very different example, a low grade on a paper in
composition is part of unprogrammed terminal contingencies which do
not respect details of the student’s behavior and hence do not teach
good writing, but a series of small punishments for bad grammar,
illogical constructions, and solecisms, for example, may be useful. The

simplest way to escape punishment of this sort is, of course, simply to
stop writing, but if the student continues, he may learn something.
There is probably always an element of punishment in
unprogrammed terminal contingencies since failure to be reinforced is
slightly aversive. Such contingencies, however, are designed to
generate behavior rather than to suppress it. They are aspects of the
aversive control discussed in Chapter 5 or of what is traditionally called
the use of punishment “to compel the student to study.” We are
concerned here with what is traditionally called the use of punishment
“to elevate morals”—to suppress wrong doing, to break wills, to
exorcise evil spirits (as in “whipping the devil out of a boy”), and so
on. This is not a simple reversal of positive conditioning.
If punishment is used, it should be used effectively. Efforts to reduce
its scope may actually extend it. The humane teacher often resorts to
warning the student: “If you do that again, I will have to punish you.”
As a conditioned aversive stimulus, a warning is a mild punishment,
but it is also a discriminative stimulus, and a student who is punished
only after being warned will discriminate between occasions when
behavior is and is not punished and will show the effects of punishment
only after a warning has been given. Another mistake is to punish only
gross instances of the unwanted behavior. The student is thus
encouraged to go as far as he dares, and the effect on the teacher may
lead to the construction of a program which actually strengthens the
behavior to be suppressed. Punishing a student only occasionally can
be even more harmful. Punished behavior almost always has strong
positively reinforcing consequences, and when these are intermittently
free from aversive accompaniments, behavior may become particularly
resistant to suppression.
No matter how good the contingencies or how light the punishment,
the by-products discussed in Chapter 5 cannot all be avoided, and if we
try to suppress them by punishing more severely, we only generate
more severe by-products. Hence it is important to consider techniques
which suppress behavior in other ways.
One possibility is to eliminate the conditions which give rise to
unwanted behavior. We can avoid troublesome consequences of the
punishment inherent in being wrong by constructing programs in which
the student is almost always right. We can isolate the classroom to
avoid the distractions of the outside world, we can make furniture too
rugged to be damaged, we can build schools which have no windows to
be broken, we can segregate the sexes. In other words we can construct

a cloister—a world in which unwanted behavior is not likely to occur.
Unfortunately, it is often a world in which wanted behavior is also
lacking.
Some disciplinary problems come from instructional contingencies
which can be changed. We may not need to punish a student to induce
him to work carefully—to stop and think—if we can avoid reinforcing
him for hasty, ill-considered work. We need to revise instructional
contingencies which specify the so-called differential reinforcement of
high rate. In class, for example, it is often only the first correct answer
which is reinforced, and almost all tests must be finished on time. The
result is speed, which we call haste when the behavior is unsuccessful.
Good programmed instruction solves the problem by making
reinforcement almost independent of speed. The student works at the
speed at which he is most effective, and only the ultimate
reinforcement of finishing a program works against optimal pacing.
Similarly, we can avoid punishing students for guessing by revising
contingencies so that guessing is not reinforced—as it is 50 percent of
the time, for example, in a true-false test. We can avoid punishing
students for cheating by making sure that important reinforcers are not
contingent on right answers when cheating is possible.
Many disciplinary problems can be traced, as we saw in Chapter 5,
to aversive control. Students are almost always constrained—if not by
the physical walls of a classroom then by aversive contingencies, and
many indirect or disguised forms of escape call for disciplinary
management. The problem can be solved by reinforcing them for
remaining in class. Competitive arrangements also breed asocial
behaviors which can be avoided by using other kinds of contingencies.
The teacher often gets into trouble because he is unaware of the
reinforcing and punishing effects of his own actions. What appears to
be punishment is sometimes reinforcing; a student misbehaves to annoy
his teacher or to be admired by his peers when he takes punishment. If
the teacher’s attention is reinforcing, unwanted responses which attract
attention are strengthened. A fatal principle is “letting well enough
alone”—giving no attention to a student so long as he behaves well and
turning to him only when he begins to cause trouble. Under most
circumstances, dismissing a class may be reinforcing to the student, but
the teacher is likely to dismiss the class when trouble is brewing and
thus reinforce early stages of troublemaking (see page 256).
Another alternative to the use of punishment is to strengthen
behavior which is incompatible with the behavior to be suppressed.

“Incompatible” may simply mean preempting available time. Students
are kept busy in unobjectionable ways because “the devil always has
something for idle hands to do.” The unwanted behavior is not
necessarily strong, but nothing else is at the moment stronger.
What is needed is often little more than an available alternative.
Obscenity and profanity appear when acceptable verbal behavior is
weak. They are characteristic of “mental fatigue”—a condition in
which stimuli are not carefully discriminated and responses requiring
skillful execution are not easily emitted. They are also common when
equally effective standard behavior has not been acquired. A more
specific incompatibility is topographical. We offset the destructive use
of property by reinforcing good care; we suppress aggressive
competition by teaching cooperation. This is the kind of incompatible
behavior we hope to strengthen by punishing its obverse—encouraging
industry, for example, by punishing idleness—but positive
contingencies are more effective. In general the problem of classroom
discipline is solved most satisfactorily when instructional contingencies
compete successfully with the rest of the student’s environment.
The effects of earlier practices do not vanish at once when a change
is made. If the student has been studying in order to escape aversive
sanctions, he may not immediately come under the control of positive
reinforcers. If he has been reinforced for cheating, he may still cheat. If
he has responded to aversive control by acting aggressively toward the
teacher or the school, he may continue to do so. Under substantially
changed contingencies, however, the behavior will undergo extinction,
and effective instruction can then take over. Residual effects may be
least troublesome in a different school or under a different teacher. The
advantages of a positive program are not easily evaluated while a
change is taking place. The teacher may need the confidence to be
derived from a scientific analysis in order to survive the transition.

ETHICAL SELF-MANAGEMENT
To some extent we teach effective social behavior response by
response with the techniques used for other verbal and nonverbal
repertoires. We reinforce a child either positively or negatively when
he does and says the right things at the right time. The reinforcement is
important. As we saw in Chapter 1, Aristotle was overworking the
theory of learning-by-doing when he insisted that “it is by doing just

acts that we become just, by doing temperate acts that we become
temperate, and by doing brave deeds that we become brave.” Terms
like just, temperate, and brave do not specify topographies of response,
but specific instances of the behavior called just, temperate, or brave
can no doubt be shaped and maintained. It is hard, however, to arrange
the necessary contingencies.
The usual solution is to teach precept rather than practice. Rather
than learning to behave well, the child learns rules which he is to
follow in order to behave well. An old copybook maxim will serve as
an example. A culture presumably gains if its members do not act
violently toward each other in anger. The culture cannot conveniently
restrain all its angry members by force, however, and it will only
generate other problems if it tries to punish violence so that men will
either be afraid to attack each other or will be automatically reinforced
when they engage in nonviolent behavior. Another possibility is to
teach each child to say to himself, “Count to ten before acting in
anger.” As verbal behavior, this can be taught as easily as “Hi diddle
diddle.” Unfortunately it may have as little effect. But the student may
also be taught to put the precept into practice—literally executing the
behavior of counting to ten whenever he is angry. He is then less likely
to act in anger since an incitement loses much of its force during a
count of ten. Maxims of this sort are not highly regarded, possibly just
because they do not, as verbal responses, guarantee results, but they
represent one way in which the group may teach its members to avoid
the aversive consequences of some forms of behavior by doing
something else instead.
Not all precepts have the form of instructions. “Haste makes waste”
describes a set of contingencies: the consequences of hasty behavior
are indeed often aversive. Again, reciting the precept may have little if
any effect, but if waste is already aversive, the statement may make
haste aversive also (47). A person who makes the statement or hears it
made by others is possibly more likely to move carefully as a form of
avoidance. Teaching a student to obey the law is subject to a similar
analysis.
The ethical problems to be met by an individual cannot of course all
be foreseen, and the culture may need to teach a kind of ethical
problem solving which permits the individual to arrive at his own
precepts as occasion demands. This is sometimes done by teaching
second-order precepts or ethical heuristics. Teaching the student about
himself as a behaving organism is important. Precepts useful in self-

management have at times been an explicit part of educational policy.
They are now usually left to the family and to religious and
governmental agencies, especially when they deal with punishing
consequences arising from these sources.
Personal credit is a crucial issue in ethical self-management. A
student gets little credit for behaving well when he cannot behave
badly. When he behaves well because he has been taught to do so,
response by response, most of the credit goes to his teacher. It is only
when his good behavior is the result of self-management, of what is
often called ethical or moral struggle, that he is likely to be admired.
But a careful analysis of the origins of self-management leads us back
again to the cultural environment. Personal credit survives when the
culture simply punishes bad behavior, because good behavior is not
specified by the contingencies, but techniques which teach selfmanagement directly and effectively leave no room for a “self” to be
admired.

RESPONDENT BEHAVIOR
Mentalistic theories of ethical self-management appeal to entities
which seem to be particularly accessible to introspection. The inner
forces which are said to take the place of environmental variables are
feelings. Men do brave things because they feel courageous or help
people because they feel compassionate. It would seem to follow that
to teach students to be brave or compassionate, the teacher must teach
them to feel.
We usually know what we mean when we say that we feel pangs of
hunger or a sore muscle, but what do we feel when we feel courageous
or compassionate? It does not help to say that we feel the courageous or
compassionate behavior itself or the external variables responsible for
it. One possibility is that we feel certain reflex responses usually
mediated by the autonomic nervous system. Such responses compose
what is called respondent behavior (44). They are conditioned
according to Pavlovian principles. (Early efforts to extend Pavlov’s
work to behavior in general are perhaps responsible for a widespread
misunderstanding. It is often said, quite erroneously, that a behavioral
analysis of teaching is “all a matter of conditioned reflexes.”)
Contingencies of reinforcement which generate operant behavior
almost always include stimuli which elicit conditioned or

unconditioned reflexes. The two systems are connected through the
contingencies. We say that a man faced with a situation in which he has
been punished is “anxious” or “afraid.” We observe that he is less
inclined to enter upon such a situation and more inclined to withdraw
from it. The situation has become aversive through Pavlovian
conditioning, but it is his operant behavior which has changed. What he
“feels as fear,” however, is likely to be concurrent autonomic responses
(a more rapid pulse, say, or contraction of the capillaries in the skin, or
sweating). These reflexes have also been conditioned on Pavlovian
principles. He does not avoid the situation because of them or because
of the way they feel; a single set of contingencies explains both the
avoidance behavior and the conditioned reflexes. (This is not the point
made by William James when he suggested that a man does not run
away because he is afraid but is afraid because he runs away. A man
who feels afraid is probably not feeling himself running away; he is
feeling concurrent autonomic responses.) Neither kind of behavior is
the cause of the other, nor is the feeling the cause of either. Autonomic
responses can occur when no operant has been shaped or can be
emitted, and operant behavior can occur without autonomic
accompaniments—for example, after long habituation to a dangerous
situation or when simulated by an actor.
Teaching emotional behavior is often interpreted as teaching the
feelings which lead men to behave in emotional ways. To teach men to
“hate the enemy,” for example, the Armed Services may describe
atrocities and thus make stimuli associated with the enemy aversive. It
is doubtful whether the resulting autonomic reflexes are useful, even
when felt as hatred; indeed, they are likely to interfere with effective
combat. What the Services want to strengthen are the aggressive
operants shaped by the aversive stimuli which are thus conditioned.
The behavior is not necessarily felt as hatred.
The teacher may also be interested in weakening respondent
behavior. As we have seen, Rousseau suggested teaching a baby to
accept a plunge into cold water by gradually reducing the temperature
of its bath from day to day. Something of the same sort is presumably
involved as students learn to accept the monotony of repetitive tasks or
the discomfort of hard work. Rousseau also proposed to teach a child to
withstand frightening experiences. The teacher was to wear a series of
masks, ranging from pleasant to grotesque through a carefully designed
sequence. If changes were properly programmed, the child would
presumably not be frightened by the final grotesque mask.

Psychotherapy by desensitization operates on the same principle:
stimuli eliciting unconditioned or conditioned emotional responses are
given in small doses and when the responses adapt out or extinguish,
respectively, bigger doses are given. John B. Watson improved upon
Rousseau’s technique by adding a stimulus eliciting incompatible
reactions. An object eliciting responses characteristic of fear was
presented to a hungry child in combination with food. In both clinic
and laboratory, what is to be attenuated is usually operant behavior
(particularly avoidance) rather than the emotional responses which are
felt.
Techniques designed to change attitudes are also usually concerned
with operant rather than respondent behavior. In an experimental
procedure for treating homosexuality, the patient occasionally receives
an electric shock while looking at pictures of people of the same sex,
but is not shocked, and may even be positively reinforced, while
looking at pictures of the opposite sex. The way the patient feels about
the sexes changes as emotional responses are conditioned, but changes
in operant behavior are the main objects of the therapy: the patient is to
avoid certain kinds of relations with members of the same sex and to
approach members of the opposite sex more freely.
A similar procedure, common to psychotherapy and education, is
exemplified by films designed to induce high-school students not to
smoke cigarettes. When a student has seen a film showing an operation
for lung cancer said to have been caused by smoking, stimuli
associated with smoking presumably come to elicit conditioned
emotional responses. Students who continue to smoke feel them as fear
or as a component in guilt. The same stimuli also become negative
reinforcers, which students can avoid by stopping smoking, and this is
the effect for which the film is shown.
The teacher, like the therapist, is also directly concerned with
conditioning and extinguishing respondent behavior. Some autonomic
responses are physically distressing; others (such as profuse sweating,
blanching, or blushing) are embarrassing. Others may be positively
reinforcing. Any behavior which intensifies or weakens stimuli
eliciting such responses may be automatically reinforced. The thrillseeker brings himself into contact with stimuli eliciting responses
characteristic of fear, presumably because he is reinforced either by
them or by their later disappearance. Some drugs strengthen or weaken
autonomic responses, and taking them may be reinforced because they
do. Techniques of modifying reflex behavior are based on Pavlovian

principles.
Operant and respondent behavior are both involved in the control of
eliminative sphincters. Mowrer and Mowrer (29) developed an
ingenious device to teach a child not to wet his bed. When the sleeping
child began to urinate, a bell awakened him. On Pavlovian principles
stimulation from the bladder should have been conditioned to elicit the
response previously elicited by the bell, and the child should have
awakened before urinating. The actual result was different. Being
awakened by the bell proved to be aversive, and the child learned to
avoid it by staying dry. The sphincters came under the same kind of
operant control as in the awake child, where the function of the bell
might be taken over by wet clothing or disapproval.
A device which teaches a child to urinate at a given time was also
discovered by accident in connection with some experiments in early
child care (45). When a mother puts a young child on the toilet, she
generates rather complex personal contingencies. If she stays nearby,
the child is reinforced for retaining urine because he thus prolongs
contact with her. If she leaves, the child may stay on the toilet longer
than necessary. A special toilet seat was therefore designed to tell the
mother when the child was ready to be removed. The first drops of
urine moistened a strip of paper held under tension, and when the paper
broke, a music box started to play. The music proved to be a strong
positive reinforcer, and the child learned to urinate immediately upon
being put on the toilet.
The bed-wetting device teaches the child to retain urine under
aversive control; the toilet seat teaches him to release urine under
positive reinforcement. This is operant behavior, to be distinguished
from respondent behavior in which the sphincters are opened or closed
under stimulation from the bladder.

10

A REVIEW OF TEACHING
We have considered the teaching of a few motor skills (such as rhythm
and high-jumping), a few perceptual skills (discriminating or matching
colors, tones, or patterns), certain kinds of verbal behavior
(handwriting, spelling, naming and describing, reading, and speaking a
second language), a few verbal and nonverbal repertoires (arithmetic,
memorized poetry, musical thinking, high-school physics, and human
behavior), some techniques of intellectual and ethical self-management
(attending, exploring, studying, solving problems), and a few aspects of
emotional behavior. Many other things can, of course, be taught. An
adequate technology of teaching would, in fact, be as extensive as a
scientific analysis of behavior. A book of this sort cannot analyze all
possible instructional contingencies. It may be well, however, to review
certain general characteristics of the act of teaching, particularly with
respect to subjects commonly taught in educational institutions.

TERMINAL BEHAVIOR
The first step in designing instruction is to define the terminal
behavior. What is the student to do as the result of having been taught?
To point to the ultimate utility of an education is not enough. An
educated man is perhaps better able to adapt himself to his environment
or adjust to the social life of his group, and a culture which emphasizes
education is probably more likely to survive, but terms like adapting,
adjusting, and surviving do not describe forms of behavior. They refer
to consequences of teaching which bear on educational policy rather
than method.
Terms referring to mental or cognitive processes also fail to specify
terminal behavior in a useful way. A well-known report on learning to
read (13) contains the following sentence: “Briefly stated, experts in
reading instruction everywhere agree upon the common sense
proposition that there are two major acts to be performed in the process
of reading: (1) recognizing the printed word on the page and (2)
understanding and dealing with the meaning intended in the passage.”
But recognizing and understanding and dealing with meaning are not
“acts.” The expressions do not describe the behavior of a child reading.
The term knowledge is perhaps most widely misused in this way.

Some uses of the verb “to know” are relatively harmless. We say that,
as the result of being taught, a student knows how to do things—for
example, how to tell the difference between two stimuli or between
those classes of stimuli called concepts. What we observe is that he
responds to them in different ways—gives them different names, says
they are different, matches them with different stimuli, and so on. We
teach such behaviors one at a time. Since we know how they have been
acquired, we are not inclined to attribute them to inner causes. If
anyone wants to add that our student now “sees” a difference or
“grasps” a concept, we shall not be much concerned.
Knowing how to do things in the sense in which a baby knows how
to turn over or a child how to walk or talk is also not a particularly
troublesome concept. When the behavior can be named, we sometimes
call it knowledge: we say that a student knows the Oath of Allegiance,
or the multiplication table, or a Mozart sonata if on occasion he
engages in the behaviors which have been given these names. Some
kinds of knowledge—knowing how to drive a car, operate equipment,
play chess, or go from one part of a city to another—consist of
complex systems of responses defined by practical situations, and we
call the behavior knowledge when we say that a man knows chess or
knows New York City.
It is usually obvious that we are not really explaining anything when
we say that a child walks because he knows how to walk, or that a
student distinguishes between two stimuli because he knows the
difference, or is a good chess player because he knows chess, or gets
around New York City well because he knows New York City. To
“impart a knowledge of how to do things” is simply to teach a person
to behave in given ways. What he knows is what he does. When we
turn to knowing about things, however, it is not so easy to equate
knowledge with behavior. Indeed, the topography of the behavior often
seems irrelevant. What we know is closer to the independent variables,
particularly the stimulating environment. Knowledge is a sort of copy
or translation of experience which the experiencer has stored and which
he can retrieve from time to time as he recalls what he has learned. The
retrieved copy controls his behavior very much as the original
experience would have done.
This is a particularly convincing formulation when behavior is verbal
because the reinforcing consequences of verbal behavior are mediated
by listeners and hence not closely related, temporally or geometrically,
to topography of response. A person can execute verbal behavior in the

absence of the environment in which he acquired it, and it is therefore
easy to believe that stored representations of the environment are in
control. He knows what something is or what is happening or has
happened if he can name the thing or event or describe it; he knows
how things work if he can describe or predict the effects of actions
taken.
Verbal knowledge of this sort is often broken down into meanings,
concepts, facts, or propositions. These are the things expressed by
verbal responses, and since they can be expressed in different ways,
they are obviously not to be identified with behavior. The fragment of
meaning which seems to control a word association, for example, must
be independent of topography since we can make the same association
in at least four different ways: by either speaking or writing a response
to either a spoken or written stimulus. In general, we cannot get
meaning from the form of a response alone. When we define a word by
giving other words which mean the same thing or a proposition as the
“class of all statements which express it,” we do not identify the thing
meant or expressed. We often test for the possession of knowledge by
evoking one of the many responses said to express it: we accept a
single definition or a single statement of fact or proposition as showing
the possession of the relevant knowledge; but this is for practical
purposes only.
We distrust sheer topography. Verbal behavior, transmitted as sheer
form of response, appears to leave knowledge behind. A man may
correctly repeat what someone has just said, or read what someone has
written, or recite what he has learned without knowing what he is
saying. He may even do so while speaking in a tongue unknown to
him. So far as we can tell, all he really knows is how to echo, read, or
respond intraverbally. We distrust hearsay and book learning and prefer
practice to precept. This was Plato’s point in discrediting the invention
of the alphabet: “They [who have read what others have written] will
appear to be omniscient and will generally know nothing.” It was
Rousseau’s point when he said: “I hate books. They only teach one to
talk about things of which one knows nothing.” The objection is not
that the behavior is wrong (the original writer may have been
responding appropriately) but that what is being talked about plays no
part in it. (There is always the danger that the original variables have
changed and that what is transmitted has gone out of date. Bacon urged
his contemporaries to study nature not books because the books he was
talking about were no longer the best descriptions of nature, and for the

same reason we insist that textbooks keep up with a changing subject
matter. But turning to nature or, with Rousseau, making the student
“dependent on things” is primarily an effort to bring back some of the
variables lost in transmission.)
Verbal behavior which is topographically accurate but not accepted
as a sign of knowledge is often called meaningless. Nonverbal behavior
can also be meaningless; the student may not know what he is doing
when he merely imitates an instructor or follows directions. Many
theorists have tried to define meaning as a property of response, but the
term refers to controlling variables (47). At issue is the definition of
behavior. An operant is not defined in terms of topography. In spite of
many assertions to the contrary, a science of behavior is not the study
of muscle twitches. It is not to be confused with the “behavioralism” of
political science or the structuralism in social science which confines
itself to observed conduct. What these formulations neglect, however,
is not knowledge, meaning, or any other cognitive entity but the
independent variables of which behavior is a function. “To impart
knowledge” is to bring behavior of given topography under the control
of given variables.
A curious feature of knowledge, as traditionally conceived, is that it
must be stored. We are said to “memorize” our experiences, a metaphor
presumably derived from the practice of making external records for
future reference. Committing to memory is regarded as a cognitive act.
There is a temporal discrepancy between input and output, and it is
therefore supposed that an inner record of input is made and stored and
later retrieved and converted into output. The supposition is made
plausible by the analogy with computers which do indeed store and
retrieve—in a mechanized version of a more primitive use of actual
records.
Verbal learning is usually studied as memorizing. The student who
correctly recalls a list of nonsense syllables, like the Brahmin priest
who recites a Veda, is said to be retrieving a stored copy of the original
text, possibly encoded or otherwise transformed, which then acts as an
independent variable to evoke recital of the list. (The fact that he may
“see” the text in the act of recalling it supports this view, but we do not
need to assume that there was an inner copy, mental or otherwise, even
when he was reading the original text (53).)
The metaphor of storage is less compelling when behavior is
nonverbal and when knowledge is therefore more easily identified with
response. We do not say that a boy memorizes riding a bicycle and that

he is recalling his knowledge of how to ride when he rides. Nor do we
use the metaphor for verbal behavior in the case of certain formal
repertoires to be discussed in a moment—for example, we do not say
that a man who repeats something someone else has just said is
recalling how to repeat, or that a man who is reading a book is recalling
how to read.
The experimental analysis of behavior has no need for a concept of
memory in the sense of a storehouse in which records of variables are
kept and later retrieved for use. An organism is changed when exposed
to contingencies of reinforcement and survives as a changed organism.
It responds in different ways and under different circumstances, and
that is as close as we come to the storage of “knowing how.” The
storage of “knowing about” seems to raise a special problem, but the
contingencies which have modified an organism are not stored within
the organism. The student who has learned a list of nonsense syllables,
like the priest who has learned a Veda, has acquired a special repertoire
in which responses originally evoked by textual stimuli (or by echoic
stimuli supplied by someone reciting the list or the Veda) have come
under the control of other stimuli. At least one of the latter must be
present when the student or the priest begins to recite, and others are
generated as the behavior proceeds.
Let us say that we have seen a man going into a particular room. In
what sense do we then “know where he is”? We show that we know
where he is if we have occasion to speak to him and go to the proper
room, or if we are asked where he is and correctly reply. There is no
problem concerning the nature of our knowledge or its storage if we do
this just as he is disappearing or even shortly thereafter, for we have
learned to respond to discriminative stimuli under such conditions. But
what if time passes before we act? We must not overlook the
possibility that the control exercised by the external stimulus will
disappear; we may forget which room the man went into or even that
he went into any. Indeed, we forget most of what we see in that way. If
we remember, it is presumably because the man’s disappearance into
the room was significant with respect to prevailing contingencies. We
induce people to remember by making events significant in this sense;
we try to do so, for example, by punishing not remembering. A person
who is learning a list of nonsense syllables in an experiment on verbal
learning, like the student who is studying for an examination, is
behaving under contingencies designed to maximize the probability of
recall. The contingencies are not stored, but the changes they induce in

behavior last for a long time.
Even when distinguished from its supposed cognitive precursors or
its ultimate utility, terminal behavior may be hard to define. Most of
the subjects taught in schools and colleges have practical boundaries.
Students are to read, spell, write, and talk about history or science in
ways which make them effective in their environments. Those who are
already practicing in a given field exhibit the terminal behavior and are
often pointed to in defining it: physics is “what physicists do.” Only a
specialist can decide whether terminal behavior is correct, but he is not
necessarily in the best position to answer other questions about it. Only
a small part of a field can usually be taught, and the expert is not
necessarily the best person to say what part. Unless he is also a teacher,
he may not know what can feasibly be taught in the time available, or
how one subject can be taught jointly with another or sequentially in a
feasible curriculum. Moreover, he may not be particularly aware of
what he is doing. Only a few scientists are interested in scientific
methodology or the logic or philosophy of science, as only a few
historians are interested in the nature of historical thought. Obviously,
only a very small percentage of those who know how to read and write
can say what reading and writing are. No specialists are yet available in
many of the “subjects” into which the student’s behavior may well be
divided when a behavorial epistemology in the broadest sense has been
worked out. Some of the precurrent behaviors of intellectual selfmanagement discussed in Chapter 6 are taught in logic, mathematics,
and scientific method, but others are not regarded as fields in their own
right and are taught, if at all, only indirectly when teaching other
things. The behavioral epistemology which will put these things in
order may well emerge, as we have noted, from the study of teaching
itself.

THE PROBLEM OF THE FIRST INSTANCE
When terminal behavior has been specified, arrangements must be
made to strengthen it through reinforcement. Simply waiting for
behavior to occur so that it can be reinforced is inefficient—indeed, for
many parts of a terminal repertoire, quite useless. Shaping behavior by
progressive approximation can be tedious. There are better ways of
solving the “problem of the first instance.”
Behavior is sometimes physically forced, as when a child’s hand is

squeezed about a pencil and moved to form letters. A lesser force
operates when a child draws a scriber along a groove in a block of wax,
as children did in classical Greece, or in a modern plastic stencil. The
child is not in any important sense forming letters. If he learns to do so,
it is not because the behavior has been forced but because other
contingencies have been at work. It is aversive to have a hand grasped
and moved, and running out of a groove or striking the side of a stencil
is either naturally aversive or can be made so by the teacher. Behavior
(such as properly forming a letter) is reinforced when it avoids
consequences of this sort. (Similar consequences operate when a child
traces a pattern, provided running off the pattern has been made
aversive.)
Another solution is to use stimuli which elicit or evoke the response
to be reinforced. In an early experiment by Konorski and Miller (24) a
dog’s foot was shocked and the resulting flexion of the leg was
reinforced with food. An operant response simulating the reflex
eventually appeared in the absence of the shock. A similar practice is
smearing food on the lever a rat is to press or fastening a grain of corn
to the key a pigeon is to peck. The operant which eventually emerges
under reinforcement is not, strictly speaking, the response elicited by
such stimuli, even when the topographies are quite similar. When a
teacher induces a student to pay attention to an object by moving the
object conspicuously about, the attention evoked is not the attention
which the student eventually learns to pay.
These solutions to the problem of the first instance are relevant to
only a small part of standard terminal behavior. The teacher usually
evokes behavior to be reinforced in a different way. He uses a kind of
stimulus which, because of its effect, is appropriately called a prime. A
familiar example of primed behavior is imitation.
Movement duplication. A small imitative repertoire in which a
person moves as he has just seen someone else move may be part of
man’s innate endowment. It is also possible that such a repertoire is
acquired because behavior is naturally reinforced when it resembles
behavior which has just been observed in others. Most imitation is,
nevertheless, learned. Relevant contingencies arise naturally in any
social environment. A person is often reinforced when he behaves as
others are behaving because conditions are then favorable for
reinforcement. The teacher can use the imitative repertoire resulting
from such contingencies, but he usually extends it, reinforcing a

student when his behavior resembles that of a model, often the teacher
himself. Parents set up an imitative repertoire when they teach a baby
to wave or to clap hands, and they may later use it for purposes of
instruction. Dancing instructors often teach a special repertoire which
is then used to evoke complex steps.
Movement duplicating contingencies are most effectively acquired
when the model is conspicuous. The teacher serving as a model
responds slowly, repeats, and perhaps exaggerates. The student’s
behavior can also be made conspicuous—for example, by letting him
watch himself in a mirror or in a filmed or videotaped reproduction.
The contingencies are improved if the student is first taught to
discriminate between subtle features of behavior. Most students
acquire, if they do not already possess, an extensive repertoire which
permits them to copy such behavior as postures, gestures, and facial
expressions. The repertoire is sampled—for example, in intelligence
tests—by asking the subject to duplicate specific movements.
Product duplication. Movement cannot easily be duplicated if the
behavior of the model cannot be seen, but its effects may be. A person
can learn to sing a recorded song though he has not watched the
original singer; he can learn to copy a sketch though he has not seen the
artist at work. The movements of model and imitator need not be
similar, of course, as they are not when the student imitates a bird call
or sketches a real object. Imitating vocal behavior is an important
example of this “product duplication.” Much of the movement
responsible for speech cannot be seen, but the speaker is often
reinforced when his speech resembles speech he has just heard. It is
possible that man, like the parrot, is naturally reinforced when this
happens, but most product duplication can be traced to environmental
contingencies. Some of these come about naturally (if someone else is
making a given sound, making such a sound is likely to be reinforced),
but the teacher may extend the repertoire through explicit
reinforcement.
Product duplication is not to be confused with the production of
stimuli which are reinforcing for other reasons. The student may be
automatically reinforced as he picks out a familiar tune on the piano
even though he has not recently heard it. He may be reinforced as he
mimicks a prestigious figure though he has not recently seen or heard
him. Reinforcement of this sort may contribute to product-duplicating
contingencies, but a distinction may still be made. One may be

reinforced for duplicating stimuli which are actually punishing, as
when a sensitive musician is paid for imitating a bad player.
Product-duplicating contingencies are also improved by making both
the model and the product as clear as possible-in the latter case, for
example, by allowing the student to listen to his own recorded speech
or even to see it converted into a visual display. Automatic
reinforcement is also more effective if the student has been taught to
discriminate among the stimuli at issue.
Nonduplicative repertoires. Behavior may also be primed with the
help of preestablished repertoires in which neither the responses nor
their products resemble controlling stimuli. Verbal instructions are
perhaps the best examples of this kind of prime. In drilling a squad of
soldiers, calling a square dance, or ordering a meal, the speaker is
reinforced when specific responses on the part of the listener are
evoked by verbal stimuli. We use such stimuli to tell someone what to
do, which is quite different from showing him what to do. The witness
who reads an oath in a British court of law is behaving in a different
way from the witness who repeats an oath after an officer of the court
in the United States. (Both are assumed to be behaving in still a third
way: asserting the behavior which is thus primed.)
Nonduplicative repertoires are not generated by natural
contingencies; they must be taught by a verbal community. They are
not always used for purposes of instruction. The important thing for the
speaker is that the listener responds, not that he learns anything. The
repertoires are very commonly used, however, to solve the problem of
the first instance: the teacher simply tells the student to behave in a
given way and reinforces him when he does so. The practice is more
efficient than shaping behavior by progressive approximation and in
many cases more convenient than using duplicative repertoires.
Priming repertoires do not wholly supplant the shaping process
because the repertoires themselves must be shaped or at least set up
with the help of repertoires which have been shaped, but they
concentrate the shaping process in the early stages of instruction. Even
when the repertoires are available, we may have occasion to return to
the shaping process—for example, to demonstrate the process, to forgo
playing the role of model or authority, or to avoid the problem of
withdrawing primes. And we must shape behavior, of course, when
relevant priming repertoires have not been set up.
Priming repertoires are often misused. Men set up and use

duplicative repertoires because they are reinforced when others behave
as they behave, but the behavior need not conform to educational
policy. Students emulate or identify with their teachers, imitating their
mannerisms, their vices as well as their virtues; and teachers are
reinforced when this happens. Men also use nonduplicative repertoires
for purposes not specified in educational policy. It is easy for the
teacher to become an authority in a sense which is not too far from the
political.
Priming repertoires are misused when the teacher accepts the simple
execution of behavior as a goal regardless of whether the student is
likely to behave in the same way after the primes have been withdrawn.
The belief that men “learn by doing” encourages the mistake. The
student repeats what the teacher says, and the teacher leaves it at that.
Thus, the slave boy echoed (more often than not simply assented to) a
series of statements as Socrates proved the theorem, and the
topographical correctness of his behavior was mistaken by the
assembled company (and by untold numbers of readers) for “knowing
the proof.” The mistake is easily made if one believes that in some
sense such a proof is already known.
In early Greek education reading aloud was evidently accepted as
equivalent to knowing what was read. Even today we often believe we
are teaching when we assign a text and make sure that the student reads
it. Mathematical texts, as we have noted, often take the student through
a proof as if in reading it he were himself devising it. The Formalistic
Fallacy includes the belief that telling is teaching and that in rolling
balls down an inclined plane the student is behaving as Galileo
behaved. The student who merely echoes the behavior of a lecturer, or
reads a text, or follows instructions in a laboratory manual does not
know what he is saying or doing any more than the illiterate person
who copies his signature from a piece of paper which he carries in his
pocket knows how to write his name.
Students make the same mistake when they study. They take notes
during a lecture or when reading a book, they reorganize, transcribe,
and outline them, they underline words to serve as primes and then read
them with special intensity. In so doing they respond to priming stimuli
and emit behavior of the proper form. But they are not necessarily
bringing that behavior under the control of new variables.
Suppose someone will be reinforced if he opens a door, and suppose
we tell him how to open it. What do we then know that he knows? If he
immediately repeats our instructions, we know that he knows how to

echo. If he learns to recite the instructions, we know that he has learned
them and that he can now tell someone else (or himself) how to open
the door. If he follows our instructions, or his own reconstruction of
them, and opens the door, we know that he knows how to follow
instructions. But there is a sense in which he may not yet know how to
open the door. He will know in this sense only if he opens the door and
is reinforced by the consequences (assuming that a single instance
suffices). He might have known how to open the door in this one sense
alone if we had shaped his behavior by progressive approximation or if
he had accidentally opened the door. Learning does not occur because
behavior has been primed; it occurs because behavior, primed or not, is
reinforced.
The consequences which reinforce verbal behavior are less clear than
the practical consequences of opening a door, and the process of
shifting control from a priming stimulus to another variable is easily
overlooked. Many different kinds of things are learned from a text but
they all represent changes in controlling relationships. When the
beginning (“phonic”) reader sounds out a word, he says the word by
emitting a series of sounds, each of which is controlled by an element
in a text. If the word is familiar, he may be automatically reinforced,
and the response will then be more readily evoked by the text, possibly
as a unit. If it is unfamiliar, various contrived reinforcers may take
control, and the child acquires a new verbal operant, which may also
come under the control of a text.
With a textual repertoire, the student reads and in doing so says what
the text says, but he learns what the text says only if something else
happens. He will learn to recite what he reads, for example, only if
some member of the verbal community reinforces him in such a way
that some of his responses come to serve as stimuli which evoke others.
The technique of memorizing a poem described on page 42 exemplifies
the transfer of control from a text to intraverbal stimuli. A text
presented in conjunction with a picture, as in the example of the
caduceus on page 82, primes a verbal response which is eventually
evoked by the picture. The change is facilitated by the techniques
already described. When a text gives directions or instructions—for
example, when it tells the student how to go from one place to another,
or how to assemble a piece of equipment—it primes nonverbal
behavior which is then reinforced in various ways. The behavior is
“known” when the student no longer needs help from the text. The
same thing happens, though by no means so obviously, when the

student learns what a text says. The text induces him to say something
by supplying a set of primes. If he is then reinforced, he will come to
say it in the absence of the text, either word by word or in paraphrase.
The execution of the behavior overtly or covertly, though probably
essential, is only the first step.

PROMPTING BEHAVIOR
When one instance of reinforcement suffices to free a response from
a prime, it is easy to suppose that the execution of behavior is the
important thing. If that were indeed the case, teaching would be merely
a matter of inducing the student to behave in given ways on given
occasions. The variables which take over from priming stimuli,
however, seldom acquire full control in a single instance. A practical
problem therefore arises: When should primes be omitted? It is
inefficient to continue to prime behavior when learning has taken place,
but if we stop too quickly, the student may have to guess, and wrong
responses may not contribute to further learning.
In traditional face-to-face teaching we solve this problem by using
only as much of a prime as is needed to evoke a response. In teaching a
child to ask for or name an object, for example, a parent begins with
the full prime: the name of the object is pronounced and the child
echoes it. Later, the parent may supply only part of the prime: he may
whisper or murmur the name or pronounce only the initial sound.
These fragments would not suffice to evoke the response if other
variables had not acquired some degree of control. A fragment of a
prime has the special effect to which the term “prompt” has been
applied in earlier parts of this book. The stimulus encourages a prompt
appearance of behavior which already exists in some strength. To
reduce the extent of a prompt is to “vanish” it. The transitive verb,
borrowed from the magician, means “cause to disappear.”
The physical force used to coerce a given topography of response
can be vanished. When a child is forming letters by moving a stylus in
a groove, a series of less constraining grooves will permit the behavior
to come more readily under the control of other stimuli. Other forms of
aversive control can also be vanished, but the process is more familiar
when the contingencies are positive. A prompting stimulus is
attenuated when a text is uncovered for shorter periods of time, reduced
in size, or shown out of focus or with parts missing. An auditory

prompt may be reduced in intensity, masked with noise, or “clipped” to
reduce its frequency range. Ryder (41) has suggested that a response be
reviewed while a prime or prompt is still effective though no longer
present. When a student learns to recite a poem with the method
previously described, traces of earlier prompts or primes may be
effective. As we have seen (page 130), students who have learned how
to study know how to limit the help they receive from primes and
prompts.
Vanishing is a subtle process, and it is not always easy to use it in
prefabricating a program. Tests with a representative sample of
students give some indication of whether too much or too little help has
been supplied. Some machines permit the student to control the extent
of a prompt. In an experiment by Matthew Israel (22) students learned
a small English-German vocabulary. The text which primed, and later
prompted, the German responses came slowly into focus. At first a
clear text was needed, but, as English-German intraverbals were
acquired, an out-of-focus text sufficed. Prompts were, of course,
eventually not needed at all. In the machine shown in Figure 5, prompts
can be presented in two stages; when the student cannot respond to an
item, he can operate the machine to uncover additional material.
Those who believe that a student learns mainly by executing
behavior are often puzzled by techniques of prompting and vanishing
prompts. If the student cannot respond, why should he not be given
maximal help? As he works through a programmed text, for example,
why should he not be permitted to look at all the correct responses? A
distinction must be made between two kinds of help. The teacher helps
the student respond on a given occasion, and he helps him so that he
will respond on similar occasions in the future. He must often give him
the first kind of help, but he is teaching only when he gives him the
second. Unfortunately, the two are incompatible. To help a student
learn, the teacher must so far as possible refrain from helping him
respond.
Teachers tend to make this mistake because they are reinforced
immediately when the student makes an appropriate response but only
after a delay when he demonstrates that he can make a similar response
on his own. The spectacle of a child struggling to form a letter correctly
is often aversive, particularly if the child is disturbed by his failure, and
the teacher can reduce this aversive stimulation by showing him how to
form the letter or grasping his hand and forming it for him. When a
student fails to recite a poem or paraphrase a paragraph correctly, the

teacher is similarly reinforced when he completes the line or makes the
point for him. In teaching someone to drive a car the instructor is
threatened by the learner’s defective performance and is therefore
inclined to continue to supply verbal instructions. In all these examples
aversive contingencies induce the teacher to prime successful responses
and thus to deprive the student of the chance to respond with minimal
help and to learn to respond without any help at all.
Stimuli used for other purposes may inadvertently serve as primes or
prompts. In a multiple-choice program, for example, the student selects
his response from an array, and each item in the array acts as a prompt.
We have seen that when wrong choices are prompted, the student
makes mistakes which he would never make without help. When a
right choice is prompted, we never know whether the behavior could
have been evoked solely by the variable to which control is to be
transferred. A student with a reading knowledge of a foreign language
may score well on a multiple-choice examination although he is unable
to write or speak the language, and a multiple-choice program never
carries him beyond that point. The difference between reading and
writing or speaking a foreign language is obvious, but there is a very
similar and possibly much more important difference in such fields as
science or history which can easily be missed.
Multiple-choice tests are easily scored by hand or machine and
programs are often written in the multiple-choice format because they
can then be presented by machine, particularly by computers, but these
practical advantages are offset by the inadvertent effects of prompts. A
common answer to this objection is that all behavior is a matter of
choice. When a student types an answer, is he not “choosing” among
twenty-six or more keys? But the point is that the twenty-six keys do
not prime right or wrong responses. For the same reason, writing or
speaking is not usefully described as choosing among the verbal
responses in the speaker’s repertoire. Multiple-choice techniques are,
of course, appropriate when the student is to learn to compare—that is,
when a response is controlled not only by the stimulus which it
designates but by other current stimuli.
A revealed text used by the student to check a response he has just
made may also act as a prompt, but it acts after the response has been
made. The machine shown in Figure 2 reinforces the child by moving a
new frame of material into place. A food or token dispenser can be
arranged to operate at the same time. But how is the student reinforced
by the machine in Figures 4 or 5 when he writes a response and

uncovers a correct version? If he has simply been taught to move to the
next item when the two texts match (perhaps at the same time operating
a token dispenser or counter), the result may be as automatic as in the
first type of machine. Discovering that one has correctly remembered
the combination of a safe by successfully opening the safe is not very
different from discovering that the combination one writes on a slip of
paper matches a stored record. But expressions like “confirmation” or
“knowledge of results” suggest that there is something more.
Confirmation should be a synonym for reinforcement, but it has logical
connotations. Quite apart from seeing that the response he has written
does indeed match a revealed text, is there some special sense in which
the student knows he is right? Possibly relevant is the fact that the
revealed text is a prime. The student has made a response first under
deliberately minimized control; he then makes it under optimal
conditions. This is more than tallying the physical congruence of two
patterns, particularly if the response was not at first easily made. It is
reinforcing when someone volunteers a name one is struggling to
recall. But what is reinforced? A rather cynical answer might be:
whatever one did that aroused the sympathy of the volunteer. Another
answer might be the struggle itself, since even though it played no part
in producing the answer, the contingencies are right for a strengthening
effect on precurrent behavior. A third answer is possible, at least when
one has already recalled the name under weak control: the response
itself may be reinforced when we confirm an answer in arithmetic or
algebra by producing it in a different way—for example, when we add
a column of figures from top to bottom and confirm the sum by adding
from bottom to top—or when we confirm a scientific hypothesis by
performing an experiment, the reinforcement provided by the result
extending to the original calculation or prediction as well as to the
confirming behavior.
The effect of a revealed answer is perhaps clearer when the student
discovers that he is wrong. With some machines (such as in Figure 2) a
wrong response goes unreinforced and may even be punished, but
when the student compares his response with a revealed text and finds
that the two do not match, the revealed text prompts the right response,
and the opportunity to make the correct response with less than
maximal help is lost. The correct response may, however, be revealed
in stages. In the machine shown in Figure 5, the student may uncover
material which tells him that the response he has written is not correct
without telling him the correct response. For example, it may list

common mistakes or describe formal properties of the correct response
which his own may not possess. It may also supply further help. The
technique is particularly important when thematic prompts are used
because the controlling relations are then usually part of what is being
learned. When we respond successfully with the aid of a thematic
prompt, two controlling relations may be strengthened, just as both the
original computation and the confirming behavior are strengthened
when we check the answer to a problem in arithmetic.

PROGRAMMING COMPLEX BEHAVIOR
The techniques of priming and prompting are used to evoke operants
of specified topography so that they may be reinforced in the presence
of specified stimuli. Other techniques are required to condition the
extensive terminal behavior represented, for example, by a course in
school or college. Behavior of great complexity cannot be reinforced
all at once, nor can it, as is commonly supposed, simply be divided and
reinforced part by part. It must be programmed.
Efforts to assimilate programming to earlier educational principles
have tended to obscure its nature. It is not simply a matter of teaching
one thing at a time. A subject is not a mere collection of responses, and
the steps in a program are more than the pieces of a final pattern. The
behavior of the student midway through a program may, indeed, be no
part of his terminal behavior.
Nor is programming simply a matter of proceeding in small steps.
Comenius, in the 17th century, urged quite justifiably that a student
never be asked to do what he cannot do, but whether a student can
successfully take a step in a program is as much a matter of earlier
preparation and current help as of the physical size of the step. Small
steps are necessary in order to keep the student within reach of
reinforcement. An effort is sometimes made to speed up learning by
asking the student to read several sentences before making a response.
It is apparently assumed that an occasional reinforcement will suffice
to keep him at work and reading carefully. But the student quickly
learns to read only that part of the material upon which the response
depends. Relevant parts are often easily identified. Material adjacent to
a blank to be filled or a choice to be made is likely to be important.
Even in a small step, as Holland (20) has shown, the response may be
controlled by an adjacent word or two. If a number of steps have the

same syntax, relevant material is likely to appear in the same position.
In general, the more material covered in a given step, the more difficult
it is to arrange a single set of contingencies. A program composed of
large steps may be a modest improvement over an unprogrammed text,
but any part of the material out of reach of reinforcement has not
actually been programmed. (The issue is not whether reinforcement
reaches backward in time but whether all the material in a given step
enters into the contingencies. Reinforcement with a greater temporal
span, far from being more effective, could miscarry by strengthening
wrong responses.)
Programming is also sometimes described as simply making sure
that the student understands one step before taking another. But
“understands” must be qualified. It is true that in a good program a
student remains at one stage until he is ready to move on to another, but
he learns at that stage only what he needs in order to move on. He does
not necessarily learn the stage thoroughly.

SEQUENCING
The steps in a program must be not only of the proper size but
arranged in an effective sequence. The student necessarily works in the
single dimension of time, but what he learns is multidimensional. The
various parts of a subject can seldom, if ever, be arranged in line; at
1
best they form a network or “tree.” All programs “branch.” As in
reading a textbook or taking a standard course, the student must cover
many different segments of a subject matter. Two kinds of sequencing
are therefore required: the steps in a segment must be arranged in order,
and segments must be arranged so that the student is properly prepared
for each when he reaches it.
Certain natural orders are inherent in many subject matters, but they
are not always useful for instructional purposes. Historical events, for
example, are usually taught in the order of their occurrence; an epoch is
usually more easily described if the student has learned about earlier
epochs, and many historical propositions refer to chronology. But other
aspects of history are not well taught as a narrative account.
Order of complexity is also not always a safe rule. The Greek
schoolboy is said to have learned first to recite the names of the letters,
then to read letters, syllables, words, sentences, and longer passages, in
that order. In such mateterial the degree of complexity is easily

established, but it is not necessarily the basis of a useful instructional
sequence. Most programs grow more complex, but only because other
principles are at work.
Behavior is often programmed in terms of difficulty. The materials
the student is to study, the problems he is to solve, and the passages he
is to read are arranged in order of ascertained difficulty. This may be
appropriate when reinforcement is contingent on outcome, to which the
term “difficulty” refers, but sequences designed to teach precurrent
behavior directly will make less use of the principle. At first glance, a
program is always ordered in terms of difficulty: the first steps are
easy, the last unintelligible; but the last step, when it is reached, may be
as easy as the first. Degrees of difficulty which may be traced to the
inadequacy of primes or prompts, or to ambiguity, or to aversive
control are also not necessarily useful guides.
The logical structure of a subject matter is not always relevant. There
may be reasons why programs should be designed on logical principles,
but they are not always logical reasons. The well-known case system,
for example, is recommended because specific instances are usually
easier to teach and remember, and are inherently more reinforcing, than
general principles; it is nevertheless often easier to teach precept than
practice, or rule than example, and the specific-general order is then
reversed. A logical order is not the order in which most behavior is
acquired and is therefore not necessarily the best order in which it is to
be taught.
Some of the issues in constructing a good program are exemplified
by the process of shaping behavior described in earlier chapters. To
begin with, very little of the terminal behavior is exhibited by the
student. The teacher seizes upon any available response which, when
reinforced, will permit him to reinforce a response closer to what is
wanted. This is not just a steady approach to a final topography.
Behavior may be reinforced so that it can be used to prime and prompt
later responses, and it may then be discarded. Extensive duplicative and
nonduplicative repertoires are usually available, but thematic prompts
usually need to be set up.
It is sometimes pointed out that if a student responds correctly 95
percent of the time, as he may do in a good program, he already knows
most of the answers and can scarcely be learning very much. But, as we
have seen, inducing a student to behave in a given way is not teaching.
His responses are to be brought under the control of new variables, and
this may happen even when he already knows how to respond under

the conditions arranged at each step in a program.
The teacher who is working in direct contact with a student has an
advantage not only in using primes and prompts but in arranging
sequences. He knows where the student stands and in what direction he
is able to move. Arranging effective sequences is a good part of the art
of teaching. This advantage is lost in constructing a program in which
the student is to work by himself, but the loss can be offset by
frequently testing the program on representative students. It is then
possible to spot bad items, to discover why they are bad, to remove
unnecessary steps, and to add steps. We shall see in the next chapter
that the student shapes the behavior of the teacher, and in the same
sense the students used to test a program write the program.
A common objection to programmed instruction is that the student
never gets an overall view. It is true that in working through a program
he is likely to be more deeply involved from moment to moment and
may spend less time contemplating it as a whole than a student who is
reading a standard text, but it does not follow that he cannot see the
wood for the trees. If the wood is important, it will be part of what is
programmed. An overall view is something the student is to learn; it is
not something he is to pick up by wandering rather aimlessly about in
unprogrammed material.
Another objection is that a program does not answer questions.
Socrates, in Plato’s Phaedrus, objected to books on the same grounds:
“If you wish to understand something they say, and question them
about it, you find them ever repeating one and the same story.” We
have not abandoned books for that reason, nor shall we abandon
programs. A program can teach the student to ask questions and to
answer them. It can teach so well that there are fewer questions to be
answered, but it need not destroy the student’s tendency to ask
questions in doing so. It is sometimes argued that multiple-choice
programs which discuss wrong answers teach something which cannot
be taught in any other way, but if a common mistake is worth
discussing, the discussion may be programmed without inducing the
student to make the mistake first.
Programming is still no doubt partly an art, but it is steadily moving
toward a technology. In a fairly short period of time, for example, we
have learned a good deal about the specification of terminal behavior,
the use of primes and prompts, and techniques of sequencing. It is a
new technology, and it is not surprising that competent programmers
are not yet in abundant supply. Knowledge of a field to be programmed

is, of course, not enough. Experts are not necessarily good teachers,
and they are not necessarily good programmers.

CONCLUSION
This formulation of teaching is far from simple, and it is difficult to
understand how it can be called, as it often is, oversimplified. Like all
scientific accounts it is simpler than the subject it analyzes, but the true
oversimplifiers are those who avoid an analysis of contingencies of
reinforcement and explain their effects instead in terms of mental
processes.
Oversimplification is often inferred from the fact that programmed
instruction emerged from the study of the behavior of animals. It is true
that animals are in many ways simpler than that special animal, man,
but it does not follow that principles derived from the study of their
behavior are not relevant to man, or that those who study animals must
believe that men are like animals in every respect, or that those who
study animal behavior never study human behavior. Human subjects
are more and more widely used in basic research, and the extension of
operant principles to education is only one of many current
technological applications to human affairs.
Programmed instruction supplies a particularly good example of the
value of research on animals. Verbal learning has been studied in the
laboratory for almost a hundred years. An extensive literature has
grown up which no doubt contains anticipations of the principles which
have just been reviewed. The fact remains that it has contributed very
little to teaching. Textbooks in educational psychology have, in fact,
paid less and less attention to it over the years. It was research on
animal behavior which clarified the contingencies of reinforcement
under which students learn, which revealed techniques of shaping
topography and bringing responses under the control of stimuli, which
emphasized the use of formal and thematic repertoires and the
vanishing of prompts—and it did so for good reason. In studying
human learning it is a little too easy to ask people to serve as subjects
or pay them for doing so. It is a little too easy to give them instructions,
to ask them to pay attention to this and not to that, to work steadily, and
to ignore distractions. It is a little too easy to enjoin them to remember
what they are to hear or see so that they will be more likely to recall it
afterward. The human subject does all this because he has learned to do

so, but he learned before the experiment began, under conditions of
which the experimenter has only a vague notion. The experimenter
does not really know why his subject serves in his experiment, or
whether or not he knows how to pay attention or is doing so, or
whether or not he knows how to look and listen in those special ways
which encourage remembering, or whether or not he knows how to
recall what he has seen or heard efficiently. In research on animals, the
contingencies responsible for behaviors of these sorts must be
explicitly constructed. The experimenter must make sure that his
subject participates in his experiment, that he attends to some features
of the situation and not to others, that he responds in a way which
maximizes the effectiveness of subsequent behavior. In the process of
making sure, he discovers what he is doing. Research on animals has
clarified the nature of instruction in the broadest sense, and in doing so
it has led directly to a practical technology.
Both the basic analysis and the technology are, of course,
incomplete, and that was to be expected. Human behavior is an
extremely complex subject. An effective technology of teaching can
scarcely be any simpler than, say, electrical engineering or medicine.
We cannot circumvent a detailed analysis by extracting a few general
principles. Just as we do not design a new radio circuit by applying a
few general principles of electricity, or a new form of therapy by
applying a few general principles of health, so the day has passed when
we can expect to improve teaching by applying a simple commonsense
theory of human behavior. The most effective techniques of instruction
will be drawn only from the fullest possible understanding of human
behavior, a goal toward which an experimental analysis slowly but
steadily moves.
1

In the early history of programmed instruction, a distinction was made between linear

programs in which the student composed his responses and branching programs in which he
selected his responses from multiple-choice arrays. The latter was called branching because, after
making a wrong choice and possibly learning why it was wrong, the student returned to the
program to choose again. But programs in which responses are composed may be branching in the
same sense: the student may learn that a response is wrong without learning what is right and may
then respond again. The term “branching” has also been applied to a kind of program in which
material is made hard or easy according to the student’s success. If he is learning to type, for
example, material is adjusted to the number of errors he is making. Programs in which responses
are composed can also be branching in this sense.

11

THE BEHAVIOR OF THE ESTABLISHMENT
Although a technology of teaching is mainly concerned with the
behavior of the student, there are other figures in the world of
education to which an experimental analysis applies. We need a better
understanding not only of those who learn but of those (1) who teach,
(2) who engage in educational research and development, (3) who
administer schools and colleges, (4) who make policy, and (5) who
support education. These people are all subject to contingencies of
reinforcement which may need to be changed to improve education as
an institution.

SUPPORT AND POLICY
People support education by actually teaching, by organizing
educational systems, by building and equipping schools, and by
inducing others to do all this or pay to have it done. Support almost
always determines policy—the same people specify who is to be
taught, how long they are to be taught, what they are to be taught, how
well they are to be taught, and so on. Presumably they are reinforced
for doing so, but what are the contingencies?
Some of the consequences which reinforce teaching or the support of
teaching are quick and obvious. Parents teach their children in order to
save their own time (a child who has been taught to dress himself need
no longer be dressed by others) and to acquire useful helpers. The
craftsman teaches his apprentice for the same reason. The
consequences determine both policy and support. Comparable
consequences, usually easily identified, are at work in industrial
education. A company pays for teaching and specifies what is to be
taught to the extent that its employees become more useful. It may
support education elsewhere for similar reasons; if it employs
scientists, for example, it may contribute to institutions which teach
science and give scholarships to students going into the field of
science. Governments teach codes of law and military skills, and
religious institutions teach doctrine and ritual, and both support similar
teaching elsewhere for comparable reasons. The student himself is a
policy maker when he chooses a course of study, and he is a supporter
of education when he contributes his own time, effort, and money; and

relatively specific consequences are likely to determine his choices and
the extent of his contributions.
Consequences which are less easily identified begin to influence
support and policy as mediating reinforcers are conditioned. When
skillful persons prove to be sources of reinforcement, skill is taught for
its own sake. When informed men prove helpful, information and
erudition become goals of education. Any account of how actual
mediating reinforcers are conditioned is, of course, highly speculative.
It is probable that primitive forms of writing and reading were shaped
by fairly immediate gains, as men learned to make marks and read
them in recording property or events, in identifying people and places,
and in sending messages. Those who learn to read and write, however,
are soon affected by various forms of generalized reinforcement. The
public scribe reads and writes because he is paid to do so and others
who read and write are admired because they do, quite apart from any
specific use to which their skills are put. Literacy becomes valuable
and, as such, a source of reinforcement for students when they study,
for teachers when they teach, and for parents and others when they pay
for teaching.
Education as something to be supported for its own sake has
repeatedly suffered from the vulnerability of conditioned reinforcers.
Behavior continues to be shaped and maintained long after the original
advantages have been lost. At one time, for example, only those who
knew Latin and Greek could read important literary, historical, and
scientific works. Reading and writing Latin and Greek became the
mark of an educated man, an educational goal in its own right, and as
such was pursued by students who never wrote or read to any other
purpose—and long after important works had been translated and a
literature of comparable importance had grown up in the vulgar tongue.
The rise of the profession of teacher must have contributed to the
growth of a discrepancy between conditioned and unconditioned
reinforcers. The contrived reinforcers of the classroom are not closely
related to immediate or long-term gains, and they make it easy for
teachers to lose sight of the significance of what they are teaching and
for those who support teaching to lose contact with what is actually
being taught. A standard goal of educational reform has always been to
restore the place of the practical consequences which determine support
and policy.
The word liberal defines a kind of education in terms of its
consequences. A hundred years ago Cardinal Newman (31) could

oppose “liberal” to “servile”—“to bodily labour, mechanical
employment, and the like, in which the mind has little part.”
Technology has changed all that by giving the mind a part in practical
consequences no longer associated with bodily labor. But Newman’s
appeal to Aristotle may still seem valid: “of possessions those … are
useful, which bear fruit; those liberal which tend to enjoyment. By
fruitful, I mean, which yield revenue; by enjoyable, where nothing
accrues of consequence beyond the using.” Nevertheless, what one
educator has called “the original and timeless philosophical claims of
liberal education” promises more than enjoyment or something which
accrues in the using. But the claims are usually shrouded in metaphor: a
liberal education “enlarges the intellect,” “improves the mind,”
“develops a sense of purpose,” “teaches an appreciation of life and art,”
“gives the student a sense of values.” Occasionally there is a hint of a
more practical gain: the liberally educated man is more likely “to
realize his potential,” “to extend his range,” “to make a unique
contribution,” “to actualize himself as an individual,” “to free himself
from the bonds of ignorance.” A liberal education also makes him more
valuable to his group, permitting him to play a more significant role in
ethics, religion, or democratic government.
Very often a liberal education is defended as a general preparation
for unforeseen contingencies, but a different principle is then invoked
as a basis of policy. Some practices of a culture contribute to its
strength, and if the culture survives, the practices survive. The result
may be quite unrelated to reinforcing consequences. The contribution
which an educational practice makes to the culture need not be
foreseen, or even later appreciated, by those who support it. Classical
education, for example, as in Greece and China, consisted largely of
learning to recite great literature. There were certain ostensible results:
the student could reconstruct passages without the help of a text and
might enjoy doing so, he could spot literary allusions and quote the
classics to his own purposes, and (of special importance before the
invention of writing or printing) he could transmit what he had learned
to others. What now seems like the most mechanical kind of learning
may have had other useful but unnoticed by-products. Students must
have learned how to submit to dull and often exhausting study and how
to recall what they had learned. They must have picked up sentence
forms and cadences which made their own speech more effective. They
must have acquired a vocabulary rich in intraverbal connections, much
of it composed of separable functionable units such as roots and affixes

(47). They must have learned complex grammatical patterns which
would permit them to compose effective sentences. All these results
may well have gone unnoticed, but the culture was nevertheless
strengthened by them and for this and other reasons survived. With it
survived the practice of memorizing classics.
To take another example, statements of educational policy never
recommend bad teaching, but bad teaching, as we have seen, has at
times been the only way in which some goals could be approached. In
the Vexations of A. J. Wentworth, H. F. Ellis (15) gives a classical
example of the discrepancy between supposed policy and actual gains.
The headmaster of the English public school in which Wentworth
teaches, like the parents who send their boys there and the boys
themselves, believes that Wentworth is teaching geometry and algebra,
when in fact he is teaching argumentation. The bright boy, Mason, will
perhaps never have occasion to prove Pythagoras’s theorem or give
“the product of the sum and the difference” but he is permanently
changed by the reinforcement he receives when he says, “I mean, it
would be a pretty good fluke if a triangle had squares on all its three
2
2
sides at once, wouldn’t it, sir?” or “When it’s a − b we have to work
away and get to (a + b) (a − b) and when it’s (a + b) (a − b), you’re still
2
2
not satisfied, sir, and we have all the trouble of making it into a − b
again, sir.” Years later, on the front bench in the House of Commons,
he will demonstrate the value of teaching geometry and algebra badly.
Like genetic mutations the sources of new educational practices are
usually unrelated to the conditions under which they are selected. A
practice arising quite by accident may have survival value, so may one
explicitly designed to maximize reinforcing consequences, and so may
one designed to maximize the strength of the culture. But it is only
recently that the strength of the culture has given rise to conditioned
reinforcers which shape and maintain policy. The first Sputnik was a
dramatic example. It immediately called attention to scientific and
technical education in the United States, and a new policy was
generously supported for its presumed contribution to the survival of
the culture, dramatized as the outcome of a competition with another
culture.
Survival is a difficult value. Ideally a system of education should
maximize the chances that the culture will not only cope with its
problems but steadily increase its capacity to do so. To design such a
system we should have to know (1) what problems the culture will

face, (2) what kinds of human behavior will contribute to their solution,
(3) what kinds of teaching will generate that behavior. A technology of
teaching is concerned with the last of these, and the second falls within
the range of an experimental analysis of behavior. The first, however,
is of an entirely different order. The first Sputnik seemed to offer a full
set of answers: (1) the problem was the mastery of space, (2) it could
be solved by scientists, (3) science should be emphasized in schools
and colleges. A few other conditions which seem to bear on survival,
not only the survival of one culture in competition with another but of
mankind as a whole, can also be fairly clearly foreseen—for example,
in the fields of health, agriculture, and the control of population. But
with respect to domestic and international politics, social structures,
and the lives of individuals, even the fairly immediate future is not
clear. It is then difficult to make the survival of a culture important to
the individual, particularly when it may conflict with powerful
contingencies of reinforcement. Patriotism and martyrdom show that
conditioned reinforcers derived from the strength of the group may
dominate the individual even when the consequences are lethal, but
new solutions may need to be found which are compatible with current
techniques of control.
If survival is not a convenient value, it is nevertheless an inevitable
one. The culture which most accurately predicts the problems it will
face and most effectively identifies the behavior most likely to solve
them will presumably put a technology of teaching to the best use. It
will thus maximize its chances of surviving and of contributing to the
culture of the future. Accidental practices and practices designed for
irrelevant reasons have survival value, but the explicit design of a
policy with respect to the strength of the culture is more promising.
Certain standard issues in educational policy are easily related to the
strength of a culture and of mankind in general.
Who is to be taught? Originally only those who could afford an
education received one, but cultures which have moved toward a policy
of universal education have grown strong and have thereby
strengthened the policy. Presumably that culture is strongest which
educates as many of its members as possible.
How much is to be taught? Cultures which have extended the
instruction received by each member have generally grown strong,
presumably in part for that reason, and have strengthened the policy.

We are still lowering the age at which pupils begin school, we are still
trying to get more students to finish high school, we are still increasing
the support of college students, and we are providing for the education
of adults. (We cannot say that each person should be taught as much as
possible, of course, because at some point the time consumed in
learning begins to conflict with the time available for using what is
learned.)
What is to be taught? It would be better to combine all three
questions and ask: Who is to be taught how much of what? The
consequences of what is taught will depend on the interests, capacities,
and careers of students, which, of course, vary widely. When what is
learned is to be put to fairly obvious use, instruction can be
appropriately designed—as in trade and technical schools. Comparable
prospective needs underlie proposals to teach high-school students
more mathematics, more science, or more of a foreign language. It is
only when the consequences which determine policy are not clear that
the policy vacillates. Liberal education is usually “improved” by
changing the curriculum, seldom with any clear specification of the
resulting consequences.
Much of what is now taught is not a matter of explicit policy.
Schools often offer instruction in subjects which available teachers can
teach. They tend to teach what can be taught with available methods
under available conditions with available textbooks and other materials.
Emile’s education was designed to demonstrate the feasibility and
scope of Rousseau’s methods. When methods change, as in the case of
progressive education, substantial changes are made in what is taught.
A teacher continues to teach those things he can teach effectively and
he tends to discard others, and as a result the content of a course
changes. Textbook writers are under similar contingencies: the
textbook is often less a balanced summary of a field than a collection of
topics which are easily taught. When they are free to do so, teachers
teach the subjects they like, and experts who determine policy also
follow their own predilections. The new math is a mathematician’s
mathematics. Difficult motivational problems are solved by teaching
what students like, and this is much more likely to be a matter of
immediate reinforcement than of any ultimate contribution. Quick signs
of progress determine policy. The beginning pupil learning to play a
musical instrument is taught one piece accurately as a clear indication
that he is learning to play, although less obvious achievements might

be more important for later skill and particularly for sustaining an
interest in music. What is taught often tends to be simply what can be
measured by tests and examinations. Behavior which does not easily
submit to measurement is neglected because it would not impress
accrediting agencies or others who judge an institution.
Many of these adventitious determiners of policy support the status
quo, but a policy designed to maximize the strength of a culture must
encourage novelty and diversity. It is true that many cultures, like many
species, have survived without appreciable change for long periods of
time, but both cultures and species increase their strength with respect
to a far wider range of contingencies when subject to variation and
selection. We have seen (page 171) that those who encourage the
student to inquire, to discover for himself, and in other ways to be
original are enlarging the supply of mutations which contribute to the
evolution of a culture. Although some mutations are useless or even
harmful, diversity is essential. The same principle applies to
educational policy. A wide range of goals, derived from a wide range
of the conditions which determine what is to be taught, is a particularly
likely source of diversity among students.
Diversity is not, however, a strong point in current policy.
Regimentation appears to be a more likely consequence of the
curricula, syllabuses, requirements, and standards imposed upon
educational systems by governments, parents, employers, and other
supporting agencies. We do not worry about regimentation, as we have
noted, so long as we know that such specifications will not be met, but
ineffective teaching is only a temporary solution. So are other equally
unplanned sources of diversity. Different schools teach different things
in different ways, teachers are different, and students have different
genetic and environmental histories. The resulting diversity no doubt
has survival value, but in the long run, an effective diversity must be
planned. There is no virtue in accident as such, nor can we trust it. The
advantages of a planned diversity have been abundantly demonstrated
in science. Men first learned about the world through accidental
contacts under accidental conditions and, hence, only within the range
of accident. Scientific methods are largely concerned with increasing
the diversity of the conditions under which things are known. Current
differences among our students are for the most part accidents. A
technology of teaching should permit us to diversify environmental
histories and increase the range of the mutations from which the
cultures of the future will be selected.

Educational policy is ultimately a matter of the design of men. How
can a culture make the best use of its genetic material? If we had a clear
picture of man at his best, we could use it as a model; but policy
makers undertake either to create students in their own image or at best
to work toward archetypal patterns set by successful men of the past.
But a culture, like a species, does not evolve simply by replicating its
successes. The distinguished men of the past have been produced by
largely accidental contingencies, and they give us no indication of what
may be made of man through a more skillful design. Early synthetic
fibers were imitations of cotton, silk, wool, and other “accidents.”
When their functions were analyzed, new fibers could be designed
which were not simply copies of old. An effective educational policy
cannot be satisfied with the replication of great historical achievements.
What the writers, artists, statesmen, and scientists of the future will be
like is not easily foreseen, but with the help of an experimental analysis
of behavior the potentialities of the human organism can be thoroughly
explored.

ADMINISTRATION
Administering a school or college often seems far removed from
teaching, but a system of administration, no matter how complex, has
only one object: to make sure that teaching occurs under the most
favorable conditions. A given method of instruction determines such
administrative details as the nature of the space in which instruction
occurs (the grove of the Greek academy, the rural schoolhouse, the
college classroom, the lecture hall, the self-instruction room), the
capital equipment used (from wax tablets to blue books, from a library
of chained manuscripts to assigned texts, from demonstration apparatus
to television, from slide projector to teaching machine), as well as the
kind of people who teach, how they are trained, the number of students
they teach, and the wages they are paid. The efficiency of a given
method affects, above all, the size of the educational plant because it
determines how many students will occupy space, use equipment, and
require the attention of teachers for how many days, months, or years.
Many of the ways in which a technology of teaching affects
administrative practices lie beyond the scope of this book, but three
representative issues may be mentioned.

The curriculum. The behavior of the student grows more complex,
subtle, and extensive as the student is exposed to educational and
noneducational environments. Ideally, the change should be
continuous, coherent, and orderly; but several administrative
difficulties arise. What the student is to learn is usually divided into the
subjects specified in syllabuses and curricula. The reasons are practical:
teachers are specialists in “subjects,” and students are grouped so that
they may study a subject together and move on together from one
subject to another. As a result, the interrelationships among different
parts of a student’s repertoire may not be recognized, and abilities and
skills common to more than one subject may never be explicitly taught
at all.
Subdividing terminal behavior in this way makes for erratic
progress. The student must finish one course before beginning another,
but this usually depends on the calendar, and he may be held up long
after he is ready to advance or forced to advance before he is ready.
There will be gaps in his program if work which he has missed—for
example, because of illness—is not made up. If he transfers from one
system to another, he will seldom take up at the right points in all
subjects. He may be taught the same thing in more than one course,
particularly when the instructor makes sure that he has met his
requirements by reteaching the requirements. If he fails a course, he
takes it all over again although he has not failed all of it.
It would be very difficult to correct all these faults in a standard
curriculum, but a technology of teaching has already proved helpful.
Programmed instruction can be used to fill gaps, to guarantee that all
students have met requirements at the start of a new course, and so on.
It offers a better solution to the problem of the stage at which a subject
should be taught. The concept of readiness in the lower grades is only
one example of a general tendency to solve some of the problems of a
curriculum by postponing instruction. Colleges have gradually come to
teach some of what was once taught in high school, and graduate
schools have found it necessary to teach or at least review what was
once more effectively taught in college. Programmed instruction
reverses this trend. When a program written for graduate students
proves effective, it is likely to be tried in college. If it works there, it is
likely to be tried in high school. But these are remedial steps. A
coherent and economical curriculum must be based on an effective
analysis of the behavior acquired by the student. Individualized
instruction will then make it possible to articulate different phases of a

program in such a way that the student moves forward with all possible
speed.
Control of the student. Should the teacher make students behave well
or induce them to do so? Should he make them study or interest them
in their studies? The answers should be matters of policy, since they
take certain ultimate effects on student behavior into account, but the
decision is likely to be left to administrators as a matter of day-to-day
management. It can seldom be left to the teacher. Students willingly
work for a teacher who uses positive reinforcement—but only until
they are threatened by the examinations and term papers impending in
other courses. Nor can one part of a school system change its control
unless other parts change. The break between secondary school and
college is particularly disconcerting here. Students who have been
reinforced by fairly immediate personal attention in secondary schools
may find themselves unprepared for a college in which the assign-andtest pattern prevails, because they have not acquired techniques of selfmanagement which enable them to study well under a threat of failure
or to carry out assignments when they are not fairly quickly reinforced
for doing so. Conversely, students from disciplined secondary schools
may find themselves ill-prepared for a permissive college and may
actually ask to be made to study. Piecemeal changes in the type of
control exerted by a system usually fail. What is needed is a sweeping
change in policy based on the demonstrated effects of different types of
control and supported by fresh administrative practices. Meanwhile,
some undesirable consequences may be offset by applying a
technology of teaching. Well-designed programmed instruction, by
making effective use of available positive reinforcers, can usually
compete with aversive techniques.
Individual differences. Administrative problems raised by
differences among students become more acute as education is
extended to those who were formally regarded as beyond its reach.
Special provisions are usually made only for extreme cases. The deaf
and the blind are taught in special ways, but lesser differences in
sensory capacities are usually neglected. For example, some students
appear to be eye-minded, they respond best to texts and pictures, while
others seem to be ear-minded and respond best to lectures, tape
recordings, and discussions. If these are genetic differences, different
methods of instruction may be needed, but if they can be traced to early

or current environmental contingencies, remedial action may be taken.
Verbal instruction probably first emphasized the ear, as teacher and
student talked to each other, but the printed page and other visual
devices shifted the emphasis to the eye. Phonograph records (“talking
books”), listening laboratories, and other audio devices have now
moved in the other direction. A careful arrangement of contingencies
would greatly reduce the effects of differences of this kind.
Gross differences in motor behavior are recognized when instruction
is designed for the paralyzed or spastic student, but little attention is
paid to less conspicuous differences even though they cover a wide
range. Defective verbal behavior—as in the stammerer and the dyslexic
—receives special treatment, and some effort is made to teach fluency
and rapid reading, but other differences—for example, in reading with
comprehension—are usually dealt with only indirectly as they affect
other achievements subject to reinforcement. Here again, if the
differences are genetic, different methods of instruction may be needed,
but a great deal can probably be done to reduce the range of differences
of this kind through environmental measures.
Motivational and emotional differences also present problems.
Students differ in their susceptibility to natural and contrived
reinforcers, both positive and negative. If the differences are genetic,
they must be recognized in the design of instruction, but if, as is often
the case, it is a matter of conditioning reinforcers, remedial action can
be taken. Emotional by-products to aversive control vary widely,
possibly in part for genetic reasons but also in part as a function of
contingencies under which the student may have learned to take
aversive stimulation.
Differences in speed of learning and forgetting, and as a result in the
size of the repertoire which may be acquired and maintained, have
political and other implications which have made them the subject of
continuing debate. These are presumably the main differences shown
by measures of intelligence. Their nature is not clear. Speed of learning
is hard to define. It can easily be shown that the behavior of a pigeon
changes as the result of one reinforcement, and the human organism
can presumably not learn more rapidly than that. There remain,
however, great differences in such aspects as the extent of the change
which may take place upon a single occasion, the speed with which
complex repertoires may accumulate, the extent to which they can be
maintained without mutual interference among their parts, and their
durability. The practical question is not so much whether these

differences are genetic or environmental as whether environmental
contingencies may be designed to reduce their scope. Special
arrangements are made for the very slow learner and the very rapid, but
differences which remain in the middle range are treated superficially.
Multiple-track systems in grade and high school allow for certain
differences, and higher institutions vary over a wide range in the
quality of their students and in their standards, but these are rough
solutions appropriate only to differences in some kind of general
ability. Little effort is made to determine whether a student finds
himself in one of these groups because of his speed of learning and
forgetting or the extent to which he possesses techniques of intellectual
self-management, or because of any of the other characteristics just
mentioned.
Failure to provide for differences among students is perhaps the
greatest single source of inefficiency in education. In spite of heroic
experiments in multiple-track systems and ungraded schools it is still
standard practice for large groups of students to move forward at the
same speed, cover much the same material, and reach the same
standards for promotion from one grade to the next. The speed is
appropriate to the average or mediocre student. Those who could move
faster lose interest and waste time; those who should move more slowly
fall behind and lose interest for a different reason. (It has recently even
been suggested that children who are particularly slow should not go to
school at all in order to avoid certain emotional by-products of failure.)
The unhappy consequences of this phalanx system have been
aggravated by the use of mass media. Television reaches large numbers
of students, but the apparent gain is more than offset by the fact that
they must all move at the same speed. It is not only differences among
students which are at issue. One student must move at the same rate in
several fields, although he may be able to move rapidly in one but
should move slowly in another. Little or no room is left for
idiosyncratic talents or interests, in spite of the fact that many
distinguished men have shown an insularity not far from that of the
idiot savant.
Problems of this sort are no doubt prodigious, but they may
nevertheless be soluble. Contingencies of reinforcement have
surprisingly similar effects over a wide range of species—a range of
“individual differences” which far exceeds any to be observed among
men. The practices which have made an experimental analysis
particularly adaptable to the study of the individual can be applied to

teaching. The teacher can choose topographies of response and stimuli
suitable to the student. He can discover effective reinforcers, positive
or negative, and condition others if necessary. He can set up
instructional repertoires. He can then design contingencies which shape
and maintain a wide range of behaviors.
By supplementing defective environmental histories and by making
sure that instructional contingencies are complete and effective, a
technology of teaching will solve many of the problems raised by
differences among students. It will not, however, reduce all students to
one pattern. On the contrary, it will discover and emphasize genuine
genetic differences. If it is based on a wise policy, it will also design
environmental contingencies in such a way as to generate the most
promising diversity.

RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
The experimental analysis of behavior on which the present
technology is based appears to differ from traditional educational
research. For one thing it seems to have no use for tests which purport
to measure what the student has learned. Tests were first used, and
continue to be used, to solve administrative problems. Some kind of
measurement is demanded, for example, if we are to know whether a
student has learned enough at one stage of instruction to move on to
another, or whether he has learned more or less than another student
exposed to the same conditions, or whether he learns more from one
text, film, or instructional program than from another. Measurement
also seems essential if we are to compare teachers, not to mention
schools and colleges, with respect to how well they teach. Educational
research has, of course, developed powerful techniques of
measurement to solve practical problems of this sort. It has not been so
successful in applying them to basic issues in the field of learning and
teaching. In particular, it has never devised measures appropriate to the
basic dimensions of behavior. What a student knows presumably has
magnitude, but what are the units? The number of questions correctly
answered on a test is quantitative, in the simple sense that right answers
can be counted, but the number depends on the arbitrary length and
difficulty of the test. Converting it into a standard score adds further
information—telling us where the student stands with respect to a
given population—but it does not yield a measure appropriate to the

behavior of the individual.
The dimensional problem can be avoided so long as a test is
regarded as a mere sample, since the sample and the universe sampled
presumably have the same dimensions. But sampling raises other
problems. If we observe that a boy rides a bicycle under reasonably
difficult conditions, we are likely to accept this sample of his behavior
as showing that he knows how to ride, but it is quite another thing to be
sure that he knows how to read—or that he knows what he has read! A
test in American history offers a very limited opportunity to behave in
ways said to show a knowledge of American history. A test in highschool physics is not an occasion upon which a student may engage in
much of the behavior characteristic of a physicist. (We reject the results
of a test for which we know the student has been coached precisely
because the sampling may be effective, the sampled repertoire being
conveniently small.)
Samples are not only small, they are biased. Under the exigencies of
testing, topography of response is overemphasized and controlling
variables neglected. The test itself does not distinguish between
responses emitted without help and those copied from other papers or
cribs. Responses controlled by a wide range of variables count no more
than those memorized as intraverbals or reconstructed from memorized
mnemonics. Responses which belong to an enduring repertoire are on a
par with those learned for short-term use, or “crammed.” Verbal
behavior integrated with a nonverbal repertoire is not distinguished
from sheer book learning.
Easily quantified responses are favored. Multiple-choice tests are
used because they are easily processed in spite of the fact that they do
not show whether the behavior is strong enough to be emitted without
prompts. A predilection for scorable “right answers” distorts our
definition of knowledge. We give the student credit for knowing the
periodic table if he constructs it correctly, although constructing it is
only a small part of what a chemist does with respect to it. Parts of the
chemist’s behavior which are more important are neglected because
they are not easily tallied or measured. Very often the responses which
are most readily accepted as signs of knowledge are precisely those
which are least likely to form part of a useful repertoire. A student is
given credit for knowing the meaning of French words if he gives
English equivalents, but the translational repertoire he thus exhibits is
not part of the behavior of a native French speaker and may even be
weak in an English-French bilingual. Although a scientist on occasion

defines his terms, the intraverbal responses called definitions are likely
to play a much more important role in tests than in the scientist’s life.
Questions and answers are such a familiar part of educational
measurement that we seldom stop to ask why this should be so, yet
answers to questions are a relatively rare form of behavior. The
historian answers questions about his subject, but his behavior in doing
so is by no means the most important part of his behavior as a historian.
A test is generally scheduled at a given time and place, and special
contingencies must be arranged to induce the student to appear and
behave appropriately. The commonest contingencies, because they are
the easiest to arrange, are aversive. A test gives little indication of the
normal probability that the student will exhibit the behavior it samples.
If, when we ask a boy to demonstrate that he can ride a bicycle, our
request implies aversive sanctions, we shall not learn whether he often
rides, but since such behavior is usually generously reinforced, we are
not distressed by this limitation. As we have seen, however, it is not
easy to identify the naturally reinforcing consequences of the behaviors
taught in schools, colleges, and graduate schools, and a test score
therefore gives us little if any assurance that the student will make use
of what he knows. The contingencies in a test are defective in other
ways. For example, since the time available to the student is usually
limited, much depends upon whether he has previously been exposed to
contingencies under which high rates of responding are differentially
reinforced. Many of these objections are familiar, and special
techniques of measurement will answer some of them, but improving
the sample does not solve the dimensional problem.
Another kind of educational research is patterned after the
psychological studies of verbal learning responsible for familiar curves
of learning and forgetting. The curves typically show changes in the
number of trials, in the time required to complete a task, or in the
number of errors made in doing so. These “quantifiable” data are
studied as a function of the conditions under which learning occurred.
Forgetting curves have the same dimensions, showing the amount
remembered or the time or trials needed to relearn as a function, say, of
the time which has elapsed since learning or of the conditions under
which learning took place. Such curves seem relevant to practical
problems, but the fact is that very little use has ever been made of them
in the classroom. They do not throw much light on behavioral
processes because trials, time, and errors are not useful dimensions.
The curves are seldom if ever smooth (fairly large numbers of cases

being averaged to obtain the familiar forms), and those who engage in
research of this kind are careful to point out that they do not describe
learning but only changes in performance.
Curves of this sort have very little significance when learning is
studied as a change in the probability that an individual organism will
behave in a given way at a given time. Changes in probability can be
studied as a function of a wide range of variables without measuring
what is learned in traditional ways. The behavior under analysis is
directly observed and hence need not be sampled. A program can be
constructed by observing the student’s responses in relation to features
of the environment simply as such. Contingencies can be designed and
their effects predicted with reasonable success. They can be changed
when necessary in the light of further observations.
Early in the history of programmed instruction it was asserted that
teaching machines and programs would permit the teacher “to teach
twice as much in the same time and with the same effort.” This appears
to be a statement about the amount learned, and efforts have been made
to test it in traditional ways. It was actually a comment on certain
features of instructional practices. When a high-school class studies
algebra with teaching machines, for example, each member is almost
continuously busy throughout a class period. The student is much more
active than one who occasionally participates in a discussion or works
on an assignment to be graded by a teacher. Under the sustained
contingencies of a good program, moreover, he is not going astray and
will not spend time later in clearing up misunderstandings. He is not
being encouraged to make time-consuming mistakes through exposure
to multiple-choice arrays or to challenging but erroneous suggestions.
He is not groping toward a terminal repertoire through a process of trial
and error. Such observed differences in the behavior of the student at
work permit a rough comparison of the efficiencies of two methods.
Can the point be confirmed in the traditional way—by measuring
what the student knows before and after he goes through a program?
What the student knows when he has finished a program is the
behavior he then demonstrates, but how shall we measure it? Shall we
simply ask him to demonstrate it again? The errors he will make in
doing so will scarcely be significant since he made very few the first
time. An arbitrary selection of items from a program, in the form of
pre-and posttests, will increase the number of errors by evoking
behavior out of context and will perhaps increase the significance of
any difference, but as we have seen, items are not necessarily samples

of terminal behavior. The comparison will not be meaningful unless the
traditional instructor is behaving traditionally, rather than participating
in an experiment. It will not be meaningful if the instructor or the
programmer know the measures to be taken. It will have no practical
significance if the students in the experiment are not behaving under
characteristic types of control. Even if these conditions could be met,
the limitations of sampling remain. The methods may still differ in the
extent to which they induce students to generalize what they have
learned to novel circumstances, to apply what they have learned to
then-daily lives, and to remain active in the field.
The existence of a basic distinction between the uses of tests for
administrative and research purposes is suggested by the fact that new
methods have seldom emerged from group comparisons of different
methods of instruction. The methods usually tested are drawn from
actual practice, from commonsense theorizing, or from nonquantitative
theories of teaching and learning. There is a useful parallel in the field
of medicine. For many practical reasons we want to know whether a
particular drug, regimen, or surgical procedure improves a patient’s
health, and statistical and other methods are relevant. Like knowledge,
health can be quantified for practical purposes without deciding upon
its dimensions. As knowledge grows, so health improves. But the basic
processes to which the change is to be attributed must be studied in
other ways. We still use group comparisons to test different kinds of
therapy, but we no longer look to them for innovations. Traditional
educational research has been concerned with problems which roughly
correspond to those in the field of public health. The experimental
analysis of behavior corresponds to physiology, biochemistry, and the
other medical sciences. It is a promising kind of educational research
because the move from basic science to technology is simple and
direct. The classroom differs from the operant laboratory only in the
degree of control. The same steps can be taken and the same effects
observed.
A technology of teaching in this sense is not far advanced because
only a few specialists in the experimental analysis of behavior are
active in education. Many areas of instruction remain unexplored, and
the roster of available techniques and available devices is certainly
incomplete. The field is still primarily one of promise rather than
achievement, but it is an exciting field for just that reason.

THE TEACHER
We come at last to the teacher. It is he who is directly in contact with
students and who arranges the contingencies of reinforcement under
which they learn, and if he fails, the whole establishment fails. His
importance is clear in the frequency with which he is blamed when new
policies or systems of administration or methods of teaching fail to
improve education. New high-school science curricula miscarry
because “the teachers are not competent.” A conference on reading
experts reports (13) that “the main reason [why some reading
instruction is not good] is a shortage of good teachers.” William James
(23) argued that there was nothing wrong with the American School
system which could not be corrected by “impregnating it with
geniuses.” He was right, but we shall have to find a more realistic
remedy. The questions to be answered are these: Why do men and
women become teachers at all? Why do they teach as they do? How
can they teach more effectively?
Originally one person served all the functions of the establishment.
He supported eduction by offering his services, he determined policy
by teaching what he was able to teach, he arranged or chose the
physical conditions under which he taught, and he invented ways of
teaching and judged them in the light of experience. He must have been
reinforced by consequences contingent on all these functions. A
division of labor then sharply reduced his role and changed the nature
of his reinforcers. For a long time he was a slave who had little to say
about what or how he taught. Later he was paid for teaching but not
generously. The Renaissance school master was “usually a poor devil
of a pedant with his little bonnet and his threadbare gown which had
seen at least five jubilees.” Nor was there any compensating prestige:
“His trade [was] considered the lowest of all, [he was] characterized by
satirists as at once conceited and incurably stupid” (27). Teaching has
grown more respectable, and people now teach in large part because
they are reasonably well paid for doing so and because the profession
has prestige. But these consequences are only roughly contingent on
their behavior as teachers. Remuneration and prestige bring teachers to
class and induce them to teach as they are expected to teach, but their
behavior in the classroom is shaped and maintained by other
consequences.

Classroom experience. Teaching is defined by the change induced in
the student. Men learn from each other without being taught. A man
may once have learned to use a digging stick by watching someone else
use one, but the digger was not therefore a teacher. It was only when
the increased effectiveness of the learner became important to the
digger that he became a teacher and changed his behavior in order to
facilitate learning—moving more slowly or exaggerating his
movements so that they could be more easily imitated, repeating some
part of an action until it could be successfully copied, reinforcing good
digging with signs of approval, arranging roots so that they could be
easily dug. Similarly, the modern child learns to talk through contact
with a verbal community, but when his talking is particularly important
to others—for example, his parents—they speak easily imitated words
in easily imitated ways and reinforce successive approximations, and in
doing so, they teach. The effect on the student is the most important
consequence shaping the behavior of the teacher. It was once regarded
as the only appropriate one; it was beneath the dignity of the teacher to
be paid. Perhaps the inefficacy of monetary reinforcement was
surmised.
Contingencies which involve the behavior of the student are,
however, also defective. Teachers do not see much of what they
achieve; they seldom hear about long-range results because they lose
contact with students before they profit from what they have learned,
and earlier effects, possibly either unrelated to or incompatible with
policy, often reinforce the wrong things. Aversive techniques, as we
have seen, are sustained by quick and conspicuous results although the
net effect is harmful. Positive reinforcement can also be misused. Most
teachers are reinforced when students respond in friendly ways, and
positive reinforcement has this effect; it is hard to arrange effective
contingencies if the student’s good will is more important to the teacher
than his progress. Other difficulties were noted in Chapter 10. Personal
relations easily disrupt the subtle process of giving help. Withholding
help so that the student has a chance to show what he can do and then
offering help quickly when he shows discouragement may reinforce
behavior which shows discouragement. The correct execution of a new
response is likely to reinforce the teacher for an excessive use of
primes. The teacher is reinforced when he successfully attracts
attention though he is not necessarily teaching the student to pay
attention. Steps taken to help a student make a discovery do not
necessarily teach discovery. Aspects of the student’s behavior which

submit to traditional kinds of measurement are emphasized. Literature,
for example, will be taught in one way if it is necessary for students to
make good grades but in another if their subsequent enjoyment is
important.
Anything the teacher does which awakens the interest of an
unresponsive student tends to be strengthened, but instruction is not
necessarily improved. Classroom behavior is the product of complex
contingencies in which teacher and student reinforce each other both
positively and negatively. If the student is reinforced by the teacher
(and not punished by his peers) when he answers a question, he will
answer as often as possible. If he can answer only when called upon,
any behavior which increases his chances of being called upon will be
strengthened. If the teacher calls upon those who hold up their hands,
he will hold up his hand—and eventually only when he can answer.
When the teacher is reinforced by a right answer, he calls upon students
whose hands are raised, but when he is reinforced by wrong answers
(as he may be if his control is aversive), he calls upon those whose
hands are not raised. A student may then raise his hand because he thus
avoids being called upon. To prevent this the teacher may sample the
responses of those who raise their hands and strongly criticize or
otherwise punish those who do not answer correctly. A skillful teacher
responds to subtle features of behavior correlated with the probability
that a student will or will not answer correctly, and a skillful student in
turn simulates those features because of the effect on the teacher.
Certain ways of raising the hand are differentially reinforced if they are
especially likely to be seen. Wild hand-waving, often accompanied by
vocalizations, may follow. If the teacher tends to call on the first
student who raises his hand, hands will shoot up swiftly, but the teacher
may offset this by ignoring students who raise their hands quickly or
wave them excessively.
Similar contingencies account for much of the verbal interchange in
a classroom, although they are much more complex and much less
obvious. The teacher asks questions which can or cannot be easily
answered depending upon whether or not he wants an answer, and he
may mislead a student to get a wrong answer. Students answer in ways
which encourage or avoid further questioning. The teacher may induce
the student to answer by implying that he cannot do so, or he may feign
ignorance himself. He may make mistakes so that students will correct
him. He may make what he is going to say more important by
generating suspense.

An excited classroom is no doubt reinforcing to both teacher and
student and may have some value. Students remain alert and, as in any
competitive system, positive and negative reinforcers are strengthened.
It is quite possible, however, that much of the resulting activity is
unrelated to instruction. The interest the student shows is not
necessarily in the subject; the behavior reinforced is not necessarily
specified in any statement of educational policy. Many ways of
stimulating a class are as foolproof as tickling a baby—and as useless.
Exciting textbooks, films, and other instructional materials are subject
to the same criticism. The unresponsive student is the despair of the
dedicated teacher, who is naturally reinforced when he arouses the
student’s interests, but activity, feverish activity in particular, is no
guarantee that effective contingencies are at work. In general, the
student who is productively reading a book, working on a teaching
machine, participating in a classroom discussion, or listening to a
lecture is not conspicuously excited. Rare moments of delight are
another matter. They are valuable just because they are rare.
Experienced teachers who have written instructional programs have
discovered another reason why it is difficult to learn to teach from
classroom experience. It is too easy for the teacher in direct contact
with his students to take remedial action. In writing a program for selfinstruction, the programmer must be careful not to mislead, not to omit
essential steps, not to ask the student to take steps for which he is not
prepared, and not to give too much or too little help. There is no similar
pressure on the teacher who is face-to-face with the student because he
can easily correct misunderstandings, fill gaps, give extra help, and
arrange new contingencies when too much help has been given. In
general, teachers who have tried their hand at programming have been
surprised to discover how many essential steps they have been
accustomed to omit and how many awkward and ineffective
presentations they have permitted to stand.
The contact between teacher and student characteristic of classroom
teaching is particularly important when the contingencies are social. In
exposition, discussion, and argumentation (written or spoken), in
productive interchanges in the exploration of new areas, in ethical
behavior, in the common enjoyment of literature, music, and art—here
the teacher is important, and he is important as a human being. His skill
as a teacher will be derived in part from his success as such, but daily
experience is not, even so, necessarily the best source of wisdom. Bad
teachers have learned from classroom experience too, and how long a

person has been a teacher tells us little about his social skills.
Classroom experience is no better at second hand. Most beginning
teachers, particularly at the college level, teach simply as they
themselves were taught. Others may emulate the teachers they have
observed, possibly while serving as assistants. An apprenticeship is a
standard feature of teacher training. But teaching as someone else has
taught can still be no more than learning from experience. At one time
doctors learned from their own experiences and from the experiences
of other doctors, but we have long since placed these sources of
medical wisdom in their proper place. A successful person is a
defective model because important details of his behavior are not easily
observed. What one sees in watching a doctor are the conspicuous
features of a stereotype; what makes him successful is perhaps not even
visible to the doctor himself if he has learned only from experience.
The apprentice teacher may learn to behave in useful ways by watching
a good teacher, but it is unlikely that he will duplicate all the behavior
which makes that teacher good.
Pedagogy. The alternative to classroom experience, direct or
indirect, is explicit instruction in how to teach–in a word, pedagogy.
The subject has, as we have noted, fallen into disrepute. Few of those
who would improve education today look for any help from “method.”
But past failures mean, not that there is anything wrong with teaching
teachers how to teach, but simply that they have not been taught well.
Effective classroom practice is as much a product of a technology of
teaching as teaching machines or programmed instruction. The teacher
is a specialist in human behavior, whose assignment it is to bring about
extraordinarily complex changes in extraordinarily complex material.
A scientific analysis helps in two ways: it provides standard materials
and practices, and it supplies that understanding of human behavior
which is essential in improvising solutions to new problems.
It helps by clarifying the assignment. The teacher who has been told
that he is to “impart information,” or “strengthen rational powers,” or
“improve the student’s mind” does not really know what he is to do,
and he will never know whether he has done it. A specification of
terminal behavior leads most directly to explicit practices and makes it
possible to see whether they are effective. The teacher is less likely to
mask his failures by claiming vague successes. It is tempting to argue
that a child who has not yet learned to read has at least been developing
a readiness, or that the student who is defective in computation has

nevertheless learned creative mathematical thinking. Being ready to
read, like thinking creatively in the field of arithmetic, is perhaps a goal
of teaching and, if so, should be defined and taught, but reading and
computation are also important assignments.
A technology clarifies the variables the teacher is manipulating, as
well as their effects. An example has been discussed elsewhere (49).
The dismissal of a class at the end of a period is often reinforcing to
students, particularly if the teacher is not too effective. If the teacher
has any leeway in choosing the moment of dismissal, he is likely to
misuse the reinforcing effect. If trouble is brewing, for example, he
dismisses the class to avoid it. This is exactly the wrong thing to do, for
troublemaking is thus reinforced. A teacher who understands the effect
of dismissal will survey the class during the final minutes of a period
and choose a moment at which things are going as well as can be
expected. This is difficult if the class is never quiet or well behaved,
but it is always relatively so at certain times. If a meter were available
to measure the noise level in the room, it would be possible to respond
with a sudden “That’s all for today” when the level is as low as it is
likely to get.
A technology of teaching improves the role of the teacher as a
human being. It provides capital equipment which gives him some of
the time he needs to be human. It frees him from the need to maintain
aversive control or to motivate his students in spurious ways. It gives
him time to take an interest in his students and to advise and counsel
them. It may open the profession to many who would otherwise be
unable to get along well with students.
A technology of teaching also permits a teacher to teach more than
he knows. A teacher was originally a subject-matter specialist, since to
learn something one naturally turned to someone who knew, and
teaching could therefore become a source of support for those who
knew. But the scholar or scientist no longer needs to teach (and he
usually seeks a low “teaching load,” as it is significantly called, when
he does). Is the converse also true? Does the teacher no longer need to
know what he teaches?
In the performing arts, sports, and other nonverbal skills, we do not
expect the teacher to be able to do what he teaches his pupils to do, or
even to have been able to do so at one time. Problem-solving skills can
be taught by those who are not experts; there have been great teachers
of mathematics who have not themselves made great discoveries. With
respect to verbal knowledge the separation of knowing and teaching

began with the invention of the alphabet. It is the author of a book, not
the teacher who assigns it, who teaches, although other instruction is in
that case usually needed. Programmed instruction carries the separation
further by permitting the teacher to arrange all the necessary
contingencies, even when he himself has never been exposed to them.
(The student who seeks out such materials and learns from them by
himself is obviously teaching himself what, as a teacher, he has not
previously known.)
It would no doubt be better if all teachers were specialists in the
things they teach, and in the forefront of knowledge the teacher is
necessarily first a knower, but there are administrative problems which
can be solved only if the teacher need not know what he is teaching.
Teachers must often be assigned to fields in which they are not experts.
Not every high school can have a teacher of mathematics able to keep
pace with the occasional exceptional student, and even large schools or
colleges cannot have subject-matter specialists in all areas in which
students may develop interests.
In the long run a technology of teaching helps most by increasing the
teacher’s productivity. It simply permits him to teach more—more of a
given subject, in more subjects, and to more students. This is not a kind
of industrial “stretch-out,” for being more productive does not mean
working harder. On the contrary, it means working under better
conditions and for a more appropriate return. As Beardsley Ruml
pointed out many years ago (40), teachers’ salaries have not kept pace
with those in other professions and in large part because their
productivity has not increased at the same rate. Many teachers today
are no more productive than teachers of a hundred years ago. More
important than salary, however, is a sense of accomplishment. Teachers
are all too aware that they do not have much to show for a day’s work.
It is a rare teacher who would devote his life to teaching one student,
but teaching larger numbers does not make teaching worthwhile if the
quality of the product suffers proportionately. A technology of teaching
by its very nature maximizes the teacher’s achievement. The whole
establishment gains. We cannot improve education simply by
increasing its support, changing its policies, or reorganizing its
administrative structure. We must improve teaching itself. Nothing
short of an effective technology will solve that problem.

THE POWER OF A TECHNOLOGY OF

TEACHING
“Human history,” said H. G. Wells, “becomes more and more a race
between education and catastrophe.” It is not a reassuring thought, for
the contestants seem unfairly matched. The forces of destruction have
never been stronger, and education still falters.
The strength of a culture lies in its members. Its young people are its
most important natural resource, its greatest wealth. The first concern
of a government in the broadest sense should be the development of the
genetic endowment of those it governs. Yet it must be admitted that
even in what we call well-developed cultures, very few men and
women come close to realizing their potential, and that elsewhere there
is a shameful waste. The necessary technology is not operative.
Although vast sums are spent on schools and colleges (and those who
would improve education almost always advocate still larger
expenditures), there is nothing which compares with the technologies
of other resources, such as water power, oil, minerals, food, and atomic
energy.
Many of those charged with the improvement of education are
unaware that comparable technical help is available, and many are
afraid of it when it is pointed out. They resist any new practice which
does not have the familiar and reassuring character of day-to-day
communication. They continue to discuss learning and teaching in the
language of the layman. It is almost as if those who are concerned with
improving medicine and public health were to talk about disease as a
lack of balance among the humors. Much of this resistance to a
technology of teaching can be traced to a general fear of power.
Educators are seldom willing to concede that they are engaged in the
control of human behavior. The word “control” itself is avoided in
favor of less threatening synonyms such as “influence” or “guide.” A
similar hesitation is seen when teachers forego teaching so successfully
that they detract from the credit otherwise due the student. Positive
reinforcement is a special threat. Aversive techniques are tolerated in
part because they eventually fail, the failure taking the reassuring form
of resistance or revolt. We can justify coercing a student because he has
the right to refuse to be coerced. To induce him to study through
positive measures seems particularly insidious because he is unlikely to
revolt. Positive control is at issue in a curious passage in Emile (39), in
which Rousseau indulges in a power fantasy:

Let [the student] believe that he is always in control though it is always you [the
teacher] who really controls. There is no subjugation so perfect as that which
keeps the appearance of freedom, for in that way one captures volition itself. The
poor baby, knowing nothing, able to do nothing, having learned nothing, is he not
at your mercy? Can you not arrange everything in the world which surrounds
him? Can you not influence him as you wish? His work, his play, his pleasures,
his pains, are not all these in your hands and without his knowing it? Doubtless he
ought to do only what he wants; but he ought to want to do only what you want
him to do; he ought not to take a step which you have not predicted; he ought not
to open his mouth without your knowing what he will say.

Absolute power in education is not a serious issue today because it
seems out of reach. However, a technology of teaching will need to be
much more powerful if the race with catastrophe is to be won, and it
may then, like any powerful technology, need to be contained. An
appropriate countercontrol will not be generated as a revolt against
aversive measures but by a policy designed to maximize the
contribution which education will make to the strength of the culture.
The issue is important because the government of the future will
probably operate mainly through educational techniques.

REFERENCES
1. Ayllon, T., and Azrin, N. H. The measurement and reinforcement of
adaptive behavior of psychotics. J. exp. Anal. Behav., 1965, 8, 357–
383.
2. Barzun, J. Review of J. S. Bruner’s Essays for the left hand. Science,
1963, 25, 323.
3. Bernstein, J. The New Yorker, May 12, 1962.
4. Bixler, J. S. A rational faith for our times. Newsletter, Harvard
Foundation for Advanced Study and Research, December 30, 1961.
5. Blough, D. S. Dark adaptation in the pigeon. J. comp, physiol.
Psychol., 1956, 49, 425–430.
6. Blough, D. S. Spectral sensitivity in the pigeon. J. opt. Soc. Amer.,
1957, 47, 827–833.
7. Bréhier, É. The Hellenic Age. Translated by Joseph Thomas.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1963, p. 86.
8. Chalmers, B., Holland, J., Williamson, R., and Jackson, K.
Crystallography, a programmed course in three dimensions. New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1965.
9. Churchill, W. Painting as a pastime. London: Odhams Press; Ernest
Benn; 1948.
10. Ciocco, A. Personal communication. 1961.
11. Cohen, I. S. Programmed learning and the Socratic dialogue. Amer.
Psychologist, 1962, 17, 772–775.
12. Coleman, C. The hickory stick. Bull. Amer. Assoc. Univer. Prof.,
1953, 39, 457–473.
13. Conference of Reading Experts. Learning to read. Princeton:
Educational Testing Service, 1962.
14. Diderot, D. Le neveu de Rameau. Published posthumously, 1821.
15. Ellis, H. F. The vexations of A. J. Wentworth.
16. Ferster, C. B., and Skinner, B. F. Schedules of reinforcement. New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1957.
17. Guimps, R. de, Pestalozzi: his life and work. Translated by J.
Russell. New York: Appleton, 1890.
18. Hadamard, J. An Essay on the psychology of invention in the

mathematical field. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1945.
19. Holland, J. G., and Skinner, B. F. The analysis of behavior. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1961.
20. Holland, J. G. A quantitive measure for programmed instruction.
Amer. educ. Res. J., 1967, 4, 87–101.
21. Honig, W. K. (Ed.). Operant behavior: areas of research and
application. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1966.
22. Israel, M. Variably blurred prompting: I. Methodology and
application to the analysis of paired-associate learning. J. Psychol.,
1960, 50, 43–52.
23. James, W. Talks to teachers on psychology. New York: Henry Holt,
1899.
24. Konorski, J. A., and Miller, S. M. On two types of conditioned
reflex. J. gen. Psychol., 1937, 16, 264–272.
25. Lindsley, O. R. Intermittent grading. The Clearing House, 1958,
32, 451–454.
26. Lindsley, O. R. Characterization of the behavior of chronic
psychotics as revealed by free operant conditioning methods. Dis.
nerv. Sys., Monograph Supplement, 1960, 21, 66–78.
27. Lucas-Dubreton, J. Daily life in Florence in the time of the Medici.
New York: Macmillan, 1961. Quotation from a review by James R.
Newman, Sci. Amer., October, 1961.
28. Marrou, H. I. A history of education in antiquity. Translated by
George Lamb. London: Sheed and Ward, 1956.
29. Mowrer, O. H., and Mowrer, W. M. Enuresis—a method for its
study and treatment. Amer. J. Orthopsychiat., 1938, 8, 436–459.
30. Neill, A. S. Summerhill. New York: Hart, 1960.
31. Newman, J. H., Cardinal. The idea of a university. Originally
published in 1852. London: Longmans, 1923, p. 336.
32. Page, D. A. General information, the University of Illinois
arithmetic project. May, 1962.
33. Polya, G. How to solve it. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1945.
34. Popper, K. On the sources of knowledge and ignorance. Encounter,
September, 1962.
35. Pressey, S. L. A simple device for teaching, testing, and research in
learning. Sch. Soc., 1926, 23, 373–376.
36. Pressey, S. L. A third and fourth contribution toward the coming
“industrial revolution” in education. Sch. Soc., 1932, 36, 934.
37. Pritchett, V. S. New Statesman, August 8, 1959.

38. Richards, I. A., and Gibson, C. Development of experimental
audiovisual devices and materials for beginning reading. Final
Report, Summary, Contract E-033 (mimeo).
39. Rousseau, J. J. Émile ou de l’éducation. Le Haye: Néaulme, 1762.
40. Ruml, B. Pay and the professor. Atlantic Monthly, April, 1957, 199,
47–50.
41. Ryder, R. Personal Communication. 1961.
42. Sidman, M., and Stoddard, L. T. Programming perception and
learning for retarded children. Int. Rev. Res. ment. Retard., 1066, 2,
151–208.
43. Sidman, R. L., and Sidman, M. Neuranatomy. Vol. I. A
programmed text. Boston: Little, Brown, 1965.
44. Skinner, B. F. The behavior of organisms. New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts, 1938.
45. Skinner, B. F. Baby in a box. Ladies Home Journal, October, 1945.
46. Skinner, B. F. Science and human behavior. New York: Macmillan,
1953.
47. Skinner, B. F. Verbal behavior. New York: Appleton-CenturyCrofts, 1957.
48. Skinner, B. F. The experimental analysis of behavior. Amer.
Scientist, 1957, 45, 343–371.
49. Skinner, B. F. Reinforcement today. Amer. Psychologist, 1958, 13
(3).
50. Skinner, B. F. Why we need teaching machines. Harvard educ.
Rev., 1961, 31, 377–398.
51. Skinner, B. F. Cumulative record. (rev. ed.) New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts, 1961.
52. Skinner, B. F. Two “synthetic social relations.” J. exp. Anal.
Behav., 1962, 5, 531–533.
53. Skinner, B. F. Behaviorism at fifty. Science, 1963, 140, 951–958.
54. Skinner, B. F. Operant behavior. Amer. Psychologist, 1963, 18,
503–515.
55. Skinner, B. F. “Man.” Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., 1964, 198, 482–
485.
56. Skinner, B. F. The phylogeny and ontogeny of behavior. Science,
1966, 153, 1205–1213.
57. Stoddard, G. D. Reported in Scottish educ. J., July, 1965.
58. Terrace, H. S. Discrimination learning with and without “errors.” J.
exp. Anal. Behav., 1963, 6, 1–27.
59. Terrace, H. S. Errorless transfer of a discrimination across two

continua. J. exp. Anal. Behav., 1963, 6, 223–232.
60. Ulrich, R., Stachnik, T., and Mabry, J. (Eds.) Control of human
behavior. Chicago: Scott, Foresman, 1966.
61. Weaver, W. Dither. Science, 1959, 130, 301.
62. Wertheimer, Max. Productive thinking. 1945. Enl. ed., Michael
Wertheimer (Ed.). New York: Harper & Row, 1959.
63. Whitehead, A. N. The aims of education. 1929. Quotation in Curtis,
S. J., and Boultwood, M. E. A. A short history of educational ideas.
London: University Tutorial Press, 1953.
64. Wilde, O. Letters. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1962.
65. Wolf, M., Mees, H., and Risley, T. Application of operant
conditioning procedures to the behavior problems of an autistic
child. Behav. Res. Ther., 1964, 1, 305–312.

INDEX
Ability, differences in, 56
Abstracting, 120
Abulia, 167
Accuracy, 176
Acquisition, 2
Adaptation, 200
Adjustment, 200
Administration, 237 ff.
Admiration, 142 f., 184, 193
Admonition, 101
Affection, 20, 151
Age, 117
Algebra, 247
Algorithmic problem solving, 134
Alienation, 168
Alphabet, 202
Analogy, 183
Anger, 192
Anhedonia, 168
Animal trainers, 11
Animals, extrapolation to humans
from, 26, 84, 225
Anomie, 168
Anti-intellectualism, 98
Anxiety, 51
Appreciation, 44, 162 f., 230
Apprentice, craftsman and, 228
Apprenticeship, 255
Approval, 62, 151
Architecture, school, 105
Argumentation, 254
Aristotle, 5
Arithmetic, 14 f., 41

Artist, 173
Assign and test, 99, 239
Attention, 12, 13, 52, 88, 97, 104, 121, 151, 160, 190, 207
Attitude, toward school, 105
Audio-visual devices, 29 f., 105, 121, 125, 159
Authority, 211
Autonomic responses, 194 ff.
Aversive control, 15, 57–58, 95–104, 148, 161, 172, 189, 257
Aversive stimuli, learning to submit to, 87
Ayllon, T., 67 f.
Azrin, N. H., 67 f.
Bacon, F., 111
Bad teaching, 231
Barzun, J., 59
Being right, as reinforcing, 156 f.
Bixler, J. S., 100
Blame, 142
Blind, 57
Blough, D. S., 13, 72
Bohemianism, 184
Books, objections to, 224
Boredom, 158
Braille, 57
Brainstorming, 183
Branching programs, 49, 221n
Bréhier, É., 107
Capital equipment, 29, 32, 55
Case system, 222
Chalmers, B., 90
Chance, role of, 180
Cheating, 189
Child, schizophrenic, 67
Churchill, W., 126
Cigarette smoking, 196
Classical education, 230
Classroom experience, 251, 255
Classroom management, 19, 54–55, 173, 186, 252, 255
Cloister, 189

Cognitive processes, 2, 117, 134
Cohen, I. S., 61
College teaching, 94
Comenius, 61, 93, 144
Competition, 11, 20
Complex behavior, 219
Composition, 33, 160, 187
Compulsive behavior, 99
Concentration, 105
Concepts, 200, 202
Conditioned reflexes, 194
Conditioned reinforcers, 147, 156, 228 f., 241
Confirmation, 218
Consumer’s revolt, 93
Consummatory behavior, 121
Contingencies, of reinforcement, 4, 8, 9, 21, 33, 54–55, 62, 67, 73, 160
Contrived reinforcers, 84 f., 104, 162
Control, of the student, 239 f.
Cooperation, 12
Copybook maxims, 192
Copying, 80
Corporal punishment, 95
Counterattack, 98
Covert behavior, 123 ff.
Craftsman, 228
Cramming, 245
Creativity, 89, 169–184
Credit, 141, 169, 193
Curiosity, 103, 178
Curriculum, 234, 237 f.
Darwin, C., 146
Day, Thomas, 104n
Deaf-mutes, 57
Decision making, 64
Dedicated student, 79, 162 f., 165, 183
Dependence on things, 173, 178, 203
Desensitization, 195
Determinism, 171
Development, 1, 117

research and, 243
Dewey, J., 58, 85, 93, 153
Dickens, C., 146
Differential reinforcement, 64, 69
Difficulty, of material, 51–52, 100
programming via, 118, 126, 128, 133, 222
as a standard, 50, 100, 142, 164
Dimensions, of behavior, 246
Discipline, 57, 185 ff.
Discouragement, 252
Discovery, 61, 109, 110 f., 143
Discrimination, 73
Discussion, 254
Dismissal of class, as reinforcer, 256
Dither, 181
Diversity, 235
Drill, 60
Dropouts, 96
Drugs, 172, 197
Duplicative repertoires, 223
Eccentric behavior, 181
Economic reinforcement, 68
Economics, of teaching machines, 27
Education, method of, 94 f., 112, 255
policy of, 227 ff.
psychology of, 59, 94
reform in, 28, 229
research in, 112, 243 f.
Effort, 54, 99
Elimination, 197 f.
Émile, 85, 104
Emotion, 72, 99, 186, 241
Enjoyment, 162 f., 254
Enthusiasm, 162 f., 183
Epistemology, 50
Erasmus, 149
Errors, 7, 37, 50, 71, 157, 248
Erudition, 228
Escape, 97, 186

Establishment, educational, 227–260
Ethical behavior, 102, 185 ff.
Ethical self-management, 191–193
Examinations, 54, 100, 235
Execution, of behavior, 211, 252
Exercise, 60, 118
Experience, learning from, 5 f., 154
Experimental analysis, of behavior, 59, 65
Expert, subject-matter, 206
Exploratory behavior, 86 f., 136, 160, 179
Exposition, 254
Facts, 202
Failure, 51
Faraday, M., 165
Fatigue, 54, 97, 190
Fear, 194, 195
Feedback, 32, 39
Feelings, 193
Ferster, C. B., 12, 64
Films, educational, 49, 54, 106, 253
First instance, problem of, 206 f.
Forcing behavior, 207
Forgetting, 98, 246
Form, of response, 119
Formal prompts, 131
Formalistic Fallacy, 133
Free association, 183
Freedom, 170, 172 ff.
Frequency, of reinforcement, 17, 21, 158
Frequency theories, 6, 32, 107
Gambling devices, schedules of reinforcement in, 64, 165
Game theory, 64
General principles, weakness of, 226
Generalization, 120, 175
Genetic endowment, 91, 243, 259
Gibson, C., 142
Glasses, shaping behavior of wearing, 67
Government, 91, 102, 186, 230, 260

Grades, 55–56, 147
Growth, 1, 117
Guessing, 189
Guilt, 196
Guimps, R. de, 128
Hadamard, J., 138–139
Handwriting, 79, 207, 215
Hard-working student, 142, 160
Haste, 189, 192
Hatred, 195
Hesitancy, 187
Heuristics, 89, 135
Hints, 39
Holland, J. G., 90
Home study, 56
Homosexuality, 196
Honig, W. K., 4
Honors, 150
Horace, 149
Human learning, studies of, 225
Hysterical deafness, 97
I Ching, 181
Idea, 130, 137
Ideas, having, 139 f.
Identification, 152
Idiot, microcephalic, 75
Idol of the Good Student, 112
Idol of the Good Teacher, 111
Idols of the School, 111
Imitation, 174, 208 ff.
Improvement, of education, 93, 259
of teaching, 19
Inaction, 98
Incentive wages, 172
Incompatible behavior, 190
Indecision, 52
Individual differences, 56, 240 f.
Individuality, 169, 172

Industrial education, 56, 151, 228
Industrial revolution, in education, 30
Industrious student, 142, 160
Information theory, 3
Inquiry, 87, 170
Insight, 111, 117, 137
Instinctive responses, 121
Instructional contingencies, 144
Intellectual self-management, 242
Intelligence, 241
Interest, 39, 49, 162 f., 183, 252
Intermittent grading, 160
Intermittent reinforcement, 159 ff.
Intuition, 111, 117
Jackson, K. A., 90
James, W., 59, 145
Jonson, B., 152
Juvenile delinquency, 99
Knowledge, 82, 103, 120, 200 ff.
analysis of, 50
of results, 218
Laborsaving devices, 37
Language laboratories, 60
Law of Effect, 10, 61
Learning, as acquisition, 2
research on, 94
Learning by doing, 5, 211
Learning process, 10, 19, 120
Learning to try, 86
Lecture as technique, 49, 106
Letting well enough alone, 190
Liberal education, 146, 173, 229 ff.
Linear programs, 49
Lindsley, O. R., 67, 160
Literacy, 229
Literature, 164, 252
Logical order, in programming, 222

Looking, 88, 136
Mabry, J., 4
Maieutics, 107, 111
Maintaining behavior in strength, 10, 158
Marrou, H. I., 95–96, 151
Martyrdom, 233
Matching to sample, 74
Maze, 9, 94
Meaning, 83, 130, 202
Measurement, 235
Medals, 150
Mees, H., 67
Memorizing, 160, 175, 203 f., 231
poem, 42, 81
Memory drum, 32, 94
Meno, 61, 107–108, 143
Mental fatigue, 54, 97, 190
Mental processes, 26, 225
Metaphor, 183
Method, educational, 94 f., 112, 255
Midwife, teacher as, 107, 144
Military training, 56
Mimicry, 209
Mind, 230
Mistakes, discussing, 224
Mnemonics, 131
Model, imitative, 208 f.
Money, as generalized reinforcer, 62
Montaigne, 96
Moral struggle, 193
Motivation, of the student, 11, 51, 145–168, 241
Movement duplication, 208 ff.
Mozart, 165
Multiple schedules, 12
Multiple-choice, 26, 33, 34, 60, 216 ff., 245
Multiple-track systems, 242
Musical thinking, 70
Narrative order, programming via, 221

Natural learning, 104
Natural reinforcers, 152 f., 162
Negative education, 104, 153
Negative reinforcement, 186
Neill, A. S., 102
Newman, J. H., Cardinal, 108
Night vision, 123
Nonduplicative repertoires, 210, 223
Novelty, 235
Obscenity, 190
Observation, 87
Operant conditioning, 61 f.
Opportunity to learn, 103
Orange juice, as reinforcer, 159
Order of complexity, programming via, 222
Order of difficulty, programming via, 222
Originality, 170, 174 ff., 178 ff.
Outcome, reinforcing, 119, 126
Overall view, of a subject, 223
Oversimplification, 225
Page, D. A., 162
Pascal, B., 110
Patriotism, 233
Pavlov, I. P., 62
Pedagogy, 94 f., 112, 255
Pederasty, 151
Perception, laws of, 107
Perceptual behavior, covert, 125 f.
Performance, 247
Periods, class, 97
Personal contact, with teacher, 55
Personal reinforcers, 151
Pestalozzi, 104, 128
Pharmacology, 33
Philosophy, of education, 61
Physical attack, 98
Piaget, J., 117
Pigeon demonstration, 66

Ping-pong, 11
Plato, 107–108, 143, 149
Play, 149 f., 161
Policy, educational, 227 ff.
Polya, G., 89, 108, 135, 141
Popper, Karl, 108
Potential, human, 78, 259
Practice, massed and spaced, 32
Precept, 192, 222
Precurrent behavior, 120, 124, 159
Pressey, S. J., 30–31, 60
Prime, 208
Priming repertoires, 210 ff.
Pritchett, V. S., 104
Prizes, 150
Problem, defined, 132
Problem solving, 12, 86, 131, 160
Product duplication, 209
Productive thinking, 143
Profanity, 190
Programming techniques, 42, 44 ff., 118, 219
Programs, instructional, 16 f., 19, 35 ff., 65, 224, 247
Progress, as reinforcer, 148, 157, 235
Progressive approximation, 10, 16, 19, 67, 207
Progressive education, 58
Prompts, 39, 131, 214
Propositions, 202
Psychiatry, 33
Psychoanalysis, 183
Psychology, 52
Psychophysics, 33, 73
Psychosomatic illness, 99
Psychotherapy, 195, 196
Psychotics, 67
Punishment, 7, 57 f., 61, 185 ff.
Punning, 182
Purpose, of studying, 146
Pythagoras, 61, 144
Quantity, of behavior, 182

Question and answer, 100
Rate, of progress, 24, 30, 56, 241
Rational powers, 111, 118
Ratliff, F., 13
Readiness, 18, 39
Reading, of good books, 78
teaching, 128
Real world, 154
Recall, 33, 103
Recency theories, 6, 32
Recognition, 33
Recognizing, 200
Redundancy, 177
Reflex responses, 194
Regimentation, 90, 169, 235 f.
Reinforcers, 19 f., 24, 62, 145–168
Religion, 102, 186, 230
Rembrandt, 165
Remedial action, 254
Remembering, 103, 106
Requirements, 90, 100, 158
Research, educational, 243
Respondent behavior, 193 ff.
Retention, 51
Reward, 7, 61
Rhythm, 69, 70
Richards, I. A., 142
Risley, T., 67
Role, of teacher, 55–56, 153
Rousseau, J. J., 85, 87, 93, 99, 102, 104, 152–153, 260
Rule, versus example, 222
Russell, B., 103
Schedules, of reinforcement, 10 f., 64 f., 78 f.
Scientific methodology, 50 ff.
Selection, of students, 52, 119, 170
Self-control, 12, 185 ff.
Self-instruction, 129n
Self-instruction room, 53 f.

Self-management, 120 f., 166, 167, 172, 178 ff., 182, 187, 193
Self-rater, 30
Self-reliance, 173
Self-testing, 30 f., 55, 60
Sequencing, 221
Shaping behavior, 66, 187, 211, 222
Showing, 103, 109
Sidman, M., 74–77, 90
Sidman, R. L., 90
Skill, 228
Social behavior, 11
Socratic irony, 111
Spastics, 57
Species differences, 13 f., 84, 243
Speed, of learning, 241
Stachnik, T., 4
Standards, 57, 79, 100 f., 164 f.
Steps, size of, in a program, 21, 157, 220
Stimulus-response theory, 3
Stoddard, G. D., 74–77, 152
Storage, of knowledge, 203 f.
“Stretching the ratio,” 158 f.
Structure, 107, 136
Student, as final authority, 50
role of, 143
Study, how to, 88, 129, 143
Studying, 87, 127 ff., 212
Successive approximation,
see Progressive approximation
Suggestion, 39
Suicide, 96
Summerhill, 102
Support, of education, 28, 227 ff.
Suppression, of behavior, 149
Survival, of a culture, 171 f., 232 f.
Syllabus, 90
Tardiness, 96
Taws, 96
Teacher, role of, 1, 26 f., 99, 216, 249 ff.

Teachers, replaced by machines, 55, 60, 65
Teaching, defined, 5, 33, 64, 223
reviewed, 199–226
Teaching machines, 22–28, 29–58, 65
Technology, of teaching, 59–91
power of, 258–260
Telling, 89, 103, 109, 212
Temper tantrums, 67
Terminal behavior, 19, 49, 86, 199 ff., 205, 222, 238, 256
Terminal contingencies, 135, 154
Terrace, H. S., 71–72, 82
Tests, 235, 244 f., 248
Textbooks, 48, 54, 253
Thematic prompts, 131
Theories, of learning, 32
Thinker, role of, 140
Thinking, 26, 51, 56, 87, 88, 116 ff.
productive, 134 ff.
teaching, 115–144
three-dimensional, 90
Thorndike, E. L., 61
Thrill-seeking, 196
Tolstoy, L., 165
Topography, of behavior, 65
Tormentor, 98
Track system, 56
Traits, 146
Transferring, of stimulus control, 72
Transition, from aversive to positive
control, 191
Translational repertoires, 177
Transmission, of a culture, 110
of knowledge, 115
Trial-and-error learning, 7, 86, 135, 160, 181, 248
Truancy, 96
Tutor, machine compared with, 37
Ulrich, R., 4
Understanding, 48, 139, 157, 175, 200, 220 f.
Unemployment, technological, 27

Uniqueness, of the individual, 170
Universal education, 233
Values, 230
Vandalism, 98
Vanishing, 42, 83, 127, 214 ff.
Verbal behavior, 33, 124, 130, 155, 201 f., 213, 240, 253
Verbal learning, 225
Visualizing, 125
Watson, J. B., 124
Weaning, of students, 52
Wertheimer, M., 136–137
Whistler, J. A. McNeill, 126
Whitehead, A. N., 161
Wilde, O., 150
Williamson, R. B., 90
Wish to learn, 103
Wolf, M., 67
Work, 99, 161, 164
Workbooks, 55
Wyckoff, L. B., Jr., 13

