CONTINGENCIES OF REINFORCEMENT

CONTINGENCIES
OF
REINFORCEMENT
A Theoretical Analysis

BY

B. F. SKINNER

Copyright © 2013 by B. F. Skinner Foundation
www.bfskinner.org
Originally part of the Century Psychology Series
Copyright © 1969 by Meredith Corporation
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or in any means,
without permission. For information contact the B. F. Skinner Foundation.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 78-90348
Printed in the United States of America
B. F. Skinner Foundation Reprint Series
edited by Julie S. Vargas
ISBN: 978-0-9899839-3-8

To LISA

Foreword
Like the early explorers of newly discovered lands, Skinner was a
pioneer. With Walden Two, Science and Human Behavior, Verbal
Behavior, and his early papers on the technology of teaching, he
was the ﬁrst to lay claim, in the name of science, to the whole
panorama of human behavior, formerly mostly uncharted. But like
all early explorers, in his push to the hinterlands of the ﬁeld he had
to pass by many alluring vistas, inviting paths, and curious
landforms, leaving blank large sections of his chart, to be ﬁlled in
by those who were sure to follow.
Many did follow, and the science of behavior developed
inexorably. But after the publication of Schedules of Reinforcement
a n d Verbal Behavior, pillars of the empirical and conceptual
analyses of behavior respectively, when he might justiﬁably have
settled into a comfortable retirement, Skinner himself was among
the ﬁrst to explore some of those byways and to extend his own
earlier accounts. Contingencies of Reinforcement is a collection of
diverse papers from this period, and it includes some of his
sharpest conceptual analyses. He took the occasion of the
publication of this anthology in 1969 to survey the domain one
more time: he appended commentaries to the papers, and in some
cases, his notes are longer than the papers themselves and as
incisive. The book, then, is not merely a recapitulation of his earlier
work but a refinement, clarification, and extension of it.
As the writer of this foreword I stand as an obstacle between the
reader and text, but I hope to pay for the impertinence by alerting
him to some of the cogent analyses to be found within. By
identifying those that I have found especially helpful in my own
attempts to understand complex behavior, perhaps I will whet the
reader’s appetite for what follows.

The Experimental Analysis/Interpretation Distinction
In early drafts of Verbal Behavior, Skinner supported his account
with experimental data whenever possible, but he found that most
of his analysis went far beyond what could be demonstrated in the
laboratory. As the empirical work became increasingly incongruous,
he dropped references to it entirely. He characterized the result this

way:
The emphasis is upon an orderly arrangement of well-known facts, in accordance with a
formulation of behavior derived from an experimental analysis of a more rigorous sort.
The present extension to verbal behavior is thus an exercise in interpretation rather than
a quantitative extrapolation of rigorous experimental results. (p. 11)

Interpretation, in this sense, has a technical meaning for Skinner.
The laboratory is the smithy in which the tools of science are forged
and from which its principles emerge, but many natural phenomena
are not amenable to experimental control. For Skinner, to interpret
the fragmentary and uncontrolled data of everyday experience is to
show how such data might arise by appealing to principles that
have emerged from an experimental analysis and to nothing else.
An interpretation, then, differs from mere speculation in that it rests
upon a set of principles that have been validated in the laboratory.
Skinner had begun to articulate this technical sense of the term
interpretation in several early papers (see Cumulative Record) but
his most comprehensive statement awaited his commentary on a
paper in the present volume:
The use of concepts and laws derived from an experimental analysis in the
interpretation of daily life is also a source of misunderstanding. An analogy from another
science may be helpful. Geophysics interprets the present condition of the accessible
parts of the earth in terms of presumed conditions in the mantle and core. It appeals
quite freely to physical laws derived from laboratory analyses of matter under various
pressures and temperatures, even though it is merely an assumption that comparable
states actually prevail in the interior of the earth. In the same way familiar facts about
verbal behavior are interpreted with principles derived from the laboratory study of
contingencies of reinforcement, even though the contingencies maintained by the verbal
environment cannot be precisely ascertained. In both these examples, principles derived
from research conducted under the favorable conditions of the laboratory are used to
give a plausible account of facts which are not at the moment under experimental
control. Neither account can at the present time be proved, but both are to be preferred to
treatments which lack the same kind of experimental support. (p. 100)

The distinction between interpretation, which rests solely on
established principles, and mere speculation, is not widely
understood, nor is it commonly appreciated how much of what we
take as scientiﬁc fact is an interpretation. Most of the facts of
cosmology, evolutionary biology, and geology, as well as virtually
all of our explanations of everyday physical events, are

interpretations, not the result of experimental analyses.
Interpretation, then, is not a tawdry sideshow of science but an
indispensable part of the main feature.

Evolution and Behavior
Darwin’s exposition of evolution by natural selection is a
parsimonious and powerful interpretation of adaptive complexity in
nature. Repeated cycles of variation and selection adequately
explain the origins of the myriad life forms that we see in nature. In
addition, if behavioral contingencies are relatively constant over
generations, adaptive behavior can be selected by contingencies
of survival as well. In Science and Human Behavior, Skinner
remarked on the evolutionary origin of reﬂexes as well as the
adaptive signiﬁcance of the principle of reinforcement and other
behavioral principles:
The process of conditioning also has survival value. Since the environment changes
from generation to generation, particularly the external rather than the internal
environment, appropriate reﬂex responses cannot always develop as inherited
mechanisms. Thus an organism may be prepared to secrete saliva when certain
chemical substances stimulate its mouth, but it cannot gain the added advantage of
salivating before food is actually tasted unless the physical appearance of foodstuffs
remains the same from environment to environment and from time to time. Since nature
cannot foresee, so to speak, that an object with a particular appearance will be edible,
the evolutionary process can only provide a mechanism by which the individual will
acquire responses to particular features of a given environment after they have been
encountered. Where inherited behavior leaves off, the inherited modiﬁability of the
process of conditioning takes over. (p. 55)

Moreover, he pointed out the analogy between the processes of
evolution by natural selection and the shaping of novel behavior by
reinforcement:
In certain respects operant reinforcement resembles the natural selection of
evolutionary theory. Just as genetic characteristics which arise as mutations are
selected or discarded by their consequences, so novel forms of behavior are selected or
discarded through reinforcement. (p. 430)

I n Walden Two, Skinner, speaking through Frazier,
acknowledged the role of genetic variation in human behavior: “Our
ten-year-olds have all had the same environment since birth, but

the range of their IQ’s is almost as great as in the population at
large. This seems to be true of other abilities and skills as well.” As
Walden Two is a novel, this statement is merely a prediction, but it
shows where Skinner stood on the topic.
Nevertheless, Skinner’s critics, and even some of his colleagues,
assumed that he neglected or ignored the role of evolution in
behavior. No doubt this assumption arose from several
circumstances: First his interpretations of human behavior invoked
principles that had been derived almost exclusively from
experiments with rats and pigeons. Second, the remarkable speed
with which he was able to shape novel and arbitrary behavior in
pigeons and other species suggested that such shaping was
limited only by an animal’s morphological features. Third, he
studied arbitrary behavior in laboratory settings, rather than
behavior typical of various species in their natural environments.
Finally, and most importantly, the public, along with many scientists,
are determined to believe that someone, somewhere, believes that
the newborn infant is a tabula rasa. Not even Locke, who coined
the term, thought that inheritance was irrelevant, and certainly
Watson believed no such thing. But Skinner inherited from Watson
the token role of extreme environmentalist assigned by popular
prejudice to anyone who suggests that human behavior can be
improved.
The Phylogeny and Ontogeny of Behavior was originally
published in Science in 1966 and should have eliminated such
misconceptions, for it is an explicit acknowledgement and
comprehensive discussion of the contributions of both the
ontogenetic and phylogenetic environments to the behavior of
organisms. Many types of contingencies are common to both
environments, but some differ, and Skinner carefully discusses
both cases. Moreover, he cites, with approval, the work of the
Brelands, who showed that under some conditions behavior of
phylogenic origin can interfere with shaping by reinforcement.
Skinner’s critics crowed with delight at these ﬁndings, but Skinner
found the Brelands’ conclusions to be “plausible, and not
disturbing.” He calmly noted that intrusions can happen in both
directions. Indeed they can; he cited examples of behavior shaped
in the laboratory that interfered with normal eating, and examples
in human affairs abound, from the use of contraceptives and vows
of chastity to hunger strikes and suicide bombings. Skinner was a
consistent advocate for a thoroughgoing science of behavior, not a

partisan trying to exaggerate the role of one aspect of the science
as opposed to another:
Early behaviorists, impressed by the importance of newly discovered environmental
variables, found it particularly reinforcing to explain what appeared to be an instinct by
showing that it could have been learned, just as ethologists have found it reinforcing to
show that behavior attributed to the environment is still exhibited when environmental
variables have been ruled out. The important issue is empirical: what are the relevant
variables? (p. 199)

Of course, some of Skinner’s proposals, presented elsewhere,
were controversial and occasioned furious objections, for he dared
to propose that the shape of the future is in our own hands.
Whatever the genetic cards we have been dealt, we can play them
much more skillfully and to better effect than we have hitherto. We
cannot change the contingencies of selection that have shaped
our genome, and our ability to engineer genetic change is still
limited, but the scope of behavioral engineering is vast. That such
an unremarkable observation should have engendered so much
controversy and emotion is a testimony to the enduring influence of
dualism in human affairs.

Rule-Governed Behavior vs. Contingency-Shaped Behavior
A major appeal of Darwin’s theory is its power and scope. A
computer program that simulates variation and selection of
sequences of DNA bases can, at least in principle, generate the
genome of every organism that has ever existed, as well has an
indeﬁnite number of other beasts that never have existed and
never will. Thus, in principle, the explanatory adequacy of Darwin’s
theory is profound. Such a demonstration does not prove that the
theory accounts for the origin of species in fact, but it shows that it
is sufﬁciently powerful to do so, given the requisite variations and
history of selection. An analogous conclusion can be drawn about
behavior. Shaping generates novel behavior through the
systematic reinforcement of variations along one or more
dimensions. A computer program that simulates variation and
selection of behavior can, in principle, generate any imaginable
topography and sequence of behavior within the limits of the
program. Since the potential scope of such as system is indeﬁnitely
large, contingencies of reinforcement are plausible candidates as
explanations of complex behavior.

However, it is easy to show that much human behavior is not
shaped through the reinforcement of successive approximations.
Rather, complex adaptive behavior often occurs in its terminal form
on its ﬁrst occasion. If we need to drive to Boston, we do not
wander aimlessly, getting successively closer with each excursion.
We consult a map, ask a passerby, or follow the commands of an
electronic navigator, and arrive at our destination, possibly without
having taken a single false turn. When telephoning a plumber, we
do not enter numbers at random; we look up the number and enter
it correctly at once. If all behavior were shaped through the
reinforcement of successive approximations to a target behavior,
the process would be conspicuous; everyone would be a
behaviorist. The abrupt appearance of adaptive behavior, common
in humans but rare in other species, fuels speculation that human
behavior requires special treatment, that it cannot be explained
with the interpretive tools that have emerged from the animal
laboratory.
I n Operant Behavior (Chapter 5) and An Operant Analysis of
Problem Solving (Chapter 6), Skinner introduced the concept of
rule-governed behavior and contrasted it with contingency-shaped
behavior. In verbal communities children quickly learn to respond
systematically to verbal stimuli: “Turn left,” “Look up,” “Raise your
hand,” “Take one giant step forward.” Given a sufﬁciently ﬁnegrained “alphabet” of responses under verbal control, virtually any
topography and sequence of behavior can be evoked at once
through the arrangement of corresponding verbal stimuli: “Take
your ﬁrst left, go two blocks, turn left at the church, then bear right
onto Livingston Avenue.” “Mix together one beaten egg, one cup
milk, one tablespoon melted butter, two cups ﬂour, one-half
teaspoon salt, two tablespoons sugar, and two teaspoons baking
soda.” Initially the reinforcement for such behavior is generalized
social reinforcement, but the behavior evoked by verbal stimuli can,
and usually does, satisfy a second contingency as well: We arrive
at our destination, and the pancakes are edible. A single
topography of behavior satisfies both contingencies; it is evoked by
the verbal contingency, but control transfers to the second
contingency, which may be verbal or non-verbal, and in the future
behavior will occur upon the appropriate occasion in the absence
of the verbal stimuli.
The effect, of course, is dramatic. In a verbal community, when

novel behavior is shaped in one person through cycles of variation
and differential reinforcement, possibly over a long time, a second
person can emit the terminal behavior through verbal instruction on
the ﬁrst opportunity. That is, the contingency-shaped behavior of
one person can become the source of control for the verballygoverned behavior of myriad others. Thus effective behavior can
spread rapidly throughout a culture and across generations. Thus,
Skinner’s conception of rule-governed and contingency-shaped
behavior was an important advance, for it accommodated many
facts about human behavior that would otherwise have been
difficult, if not impossible, to explain.

Radical Behaviorism and Competing Paradigms
The term radical behaviorism had been used in the 1920s by
various writers to characterize the work of Watson and his
supporters, and in this usage, radical was an adjective. That is, it
was intended as a descriptive term, picturesque with a touch of the
pejorative. Skinner appears to have been the ﬁrst person to
embrace the term to represent his own position. Although he
occasionally wrote of a radical behaviorism, meaning fundamental
or thoroughgoing, and certainly with no pejorative connotation, he
generally used the term as a compound noun: radical behaviorism
was a label representing a particular coherent set of assumptions
and tenets about the science of behavior, distinct from the position
he dubbed methodological behaviorism. He ﬁrst used the term in
print in The Operational Analysis of Psychological Terms , a paper
that emerged from his early analyses of verbal behavior, but his
unpublished notes reveal that he had been using the term for more
than a decade. Noting the lapse of a half-century since Watson
ﬁrst raised objections to mentalism and three decades since the
topic had been much discussed, Skinner wrote Behaviorism at Fifty
as a restatement of radical behaviorism.
In several works, but particularly in Science and Human
Behavior, Skinner discussed the status of private events in a
science of behavior, but as the central role of interpretation in
science was poorly grasped by others, his exposition was not
inﬂuential outside his ﬁeld. Behaviorism at Fifty was a renewed
attempt to make his case. At the heart of the paper is an elegant
analogy:
Science often talks about things it cannot see or measure. When a man tosses a penny

into the air, it must be assumed that he tosses the earth beneath him downward. It is
quite out of the question to see or measure the effect on the earth, but the effect must be
assumed for the sake of a consistent account. (p. 228)

Likewise, we must assume that a principle of behavior continues
to operate in those instances that do not lend themselves to
experimental manipulation. Radical behaviorism takes the position
that behavioral principles apply to all behavior, public and private,
observed and unobserved. Experimental analysis must conﬁne
itself to observable and manipulable events, but the scope of the
principles derived from an experimental analysis includes all
behavioral events.
The ramiﬁcations of this assumption differentiate radical
behaviorism from competing paradigms. Human behavior is difﬁcult
to control experimentally for at least two reasons: First, much
relevant behavior is difﬁcult to measure with our current tools; that
is, it is covert. Second, an experimenter has limited control over the
histories of human subjects. But these problems do not go away by
ﬂeeing to another paradigm. When studying human behavior, all
scientists, whatever their theoretical orientation, face the same
ethical constraints and must accommodate the fleeting, subtle, and
multidimensional nature of the subject matter. However, the
behaviorist has an important advantage: He has a set of analytical
tools that have been validated in the laboratory and are therefore
empirical, not hypothetical:
Unlike hypotheses, theories, and models, together with the statistical manipulations of
data which support them, a smooth curve showing a change in probability of a response
as a function of a controlled variable is a fact in the bag, and there is no need to worry
about it as one goes in search of others. (p. 84)

It is the “fact in the bag” more than anything else that sets the
behaviorist apart from those who subscribe to competing
paradigms. The inductive principles that have emerged from the
behavioral laboratory are not hypothetical. Any interpretations of
the available data of human behavior that rest only on such
principles are therefore superior to, not just different from, those
that rest on hypothetical constructs. The facts in the bag are
available to everyone, of every persuasion, and they don’t go away
when they are ignored. But at the time the papers in this volume
were written, the social sciences were rapidly expanding and

differentiating into subordinate disciplines whose advocates were
commonly critical of Skinner and his science. As a result of this
adversarial stance, they made the colossal error of ignoring the
facts that had been uncovered by the experimental analysis of
behavior. One looks in vain through textbooks in cognition,
cognitive neuroscience, psycholinguistics, linguistics, philosophy of
science, and related disciplines for discussions of reinforcement,
extinction, stimulus control, and other behavioral principles.
Contingencies of reinforcement are ubiquitous in human affairs. To
overlook them is careless, but to deliberately dismiss them from
consideration is foolish. The facts are in the bag, and turning one’s
back will not set them loose again.
David C. Palmer
Leverett, Massachusetts
May, 2012

Acknowledgments for this e-book version
The B. F. Skinner Foundation would like to thank the Behavior
Analyst Certiﬁcation Board (www.bacb.com) for the encouragement
and financial support that made this electronic format possible.

Preface
In a paper published in 1950 (134) I asked the question “Are
theories of learning necessary?” and suggested that the answer
was “No.” I soon found myself representing a position which has
been described as a Grand Anti-Theory (165). Fortunately, I had
deﬁned my terms. The word “theory” was to mean “any explanation
of an observed fact which appeals to events taking place
somewhere else, at some other level of observation, described in
different terms, and measured, if at all, in different dimensions”—
events, for example, in the real nervous system, the conceptual
system, or the mind. I argued that theories of this sort had not
stimulated good research on learning and that they misrepresented
the facts to be accounted for, gave false assurances about the
state of our knowledge, and led to the continued use of methods
which should be abandoned.
Near the end of the paper I referred to “the possibility of theory in
another sense,” as a critique of the methods, data, and concepts
of a science of behavior. Parts of The Behavior of Organisms (129)
were theoretical in that sense, as were six published papers,1 in
the last of which I insisted that “whether particular experimental
psychologists like it or not, experimental psychology is properly and
inevitably committed to the construction of a theory of behavior. A
theory is essential to the scientiﬁc understanding of behavior as a
subject matter.” Subsequently I was to discuss such a theory in
three other papers2 and in substantial parts of Science and Human
Behavior (135) and Verbal Behavior (141).
Another kind of theory is also necessary. We know a great deal
about human behavior, for we have observed it all our lives under
a great variety of circumstances and have learned about it from
others who have had similar experiences. We need to interpret
familiar facts of this sort in the light of a scientiﬁc analysis. Much of
Verbal Behavior is theoretical in that sense and so are discussions
of other kinds of social behavior which have appeared in four
papers3 and in Walden Two (133). Similar issues arise in the
practical application of a basic analysis, and I have discussed
some of them in The Technology of Teaching (152).
That is not a bad record for a Grand Anti-Theoretician, and to it
must now be added the present book. It is theoretical in several

se n se s. Part I traces the emergence of the concept of
contingencies of reinforcement and its use in the interpretation of
cultural practices and in the prediction and control of human
behavior. Part II takes up the nature and dimensions of behavior,
the ontogenic and phylogenic variables of which it is a function,
and the contingent relations among those variables.. Part III
returns to theories which appeal to “events taking place
somewhere else, at some other level of observation” and shows
how they are replaced by an analysis of contingencies of
reinforcement.
A reputation as an anti-theorist is easily acquired by anyone who
neglects hypothetico-deductive methods. When a subject matter is
very large (for example, the universe as a whole) or very small (for
example, subatomic particles) or for any reason inaccessible, we
cannot manipulate variables or observe effects as we should like to
do. We therefore make tentative or hypothetical statements about
them, deduce theorems which refer to accessible states of affairs,
and by checking the theorems conﬁrm or refute our hypotheses.
The achievements of the hypothetico-deductive method, where
appropriate, have been brilliant. Newton set the pattern in his
Principia, and the great deductive theorists who followed him have
been given a prominent place in the history of science.
Their signiﬁcance has nevertheless probably been exaggerated,
and in part for rather trivial reasons. Unlike direct observation and
description, the construction of a hypothesis suggests mysterious
intellectual activities. Like those who are said to be capable of
extrasensory perception, the hypothesis-maker seems to display
knowledge which he cannot have acquired through ordinary
channels. That is not actually the case, but the resulting prestige is
real enough, and it has had unfortunate consequences.
For one thing, the method tends to be used when it is not
needed, when direct observation is not only possible but more
effective. To guess who is calling when the phone rings seems
somehow more admirable than to pick up the phone and ﬁnd out,
although one picks up the phone to conﬁrm the guess. The more
unlikely the caller, the more admirable the guess, although it is no
more valuable. The extrasensory procedure is similar: to guess the
pattern on a card and then turn the card over and look at the
pattern is to make and conﬁrm a hypothesis. Such performances
command attention even when the results are trivial. Like those

body-builders who ﬂex their muscles in setting-up exercizes or
hand-stands on the beach, the hypothesis-maker is admired even
though his hypotheses are useless, just as the extrasensory
perceiver is admired even though he never makes practical
predictions of the movements of armies or ﬂuctuations in the stock
market. (Like that third specialist in unproductive behavior, the
gambler, both are sustained by occasional hits—and by very rare
hits, indeed, if they have been reinforced on a variable-ratio
schedule favorably programmed.)
The hypothetico-deductive method and the mystery which
surrounds it have been perhaps most harmful in misrepresenting
ways in which people think. Scientiﬁc behavior is possibly the most
complex subject matter ever submitted to scientific analysis, and we
are still far from having an adequate account of it. Why does a
scientist examine and explore a given subject? What rate of
discovery will sustain his behavior in doing so? What precurrent
behaviors improve his chances of success and extend the
adequacy and scope of his descriptions? What steps does he take
in moving from protocol to general statement? These are difﬁcult
questions, and there are many more like them. The scientist is
under the control of very complex contingencies of reinforcement.
Some of the more obvious ones have been analyzed and a few
rules have been extracted (see Chapter 6), particularly by logicians,
mathematicians, statisticians, and scientiﬁc methodologists. For a
number of reasons these rules apply mainly to verbal behavior,
including hypothesis-making and deduction. The student who
learns to follow them no doubt behaves in effective and often
indispensable ways, but we should not suppose that in doing so
he displays the full range of scientiﬁc behavior. Nor should we
teach such rules as if they exhausted scientiﬁc methods.4 Empirical
surveys (for example, An Introduction to Scientiﬁc Research by E.
Bright Wilson [168]) show a better balance in representing the
contingencies under which scientists actually work, but a functional
analysis which not only clariﬁes the nature of scientiﬁc inquiry but
suggests how it may be most effectively imparted to young
scientists still lies in the future.
Behavior is one of those subject matters which do not call for
hypothetico-deductive methods. Both behavior itself and most of
the variables of which it is a function are usually conspicuous.
(Responses which are of very small magnitude or difﬁcult to reach

are notable exceptions, but the problems they pose are technical
rather than methodological.) If hypotheses commonly appear in the
study of behavior, it is only because the investigator has turned his
attention to inaccessible events—some of them ﬁctitious, others
irrelevant. For Clark Hull (71) the science of behavior eventually
became the study of central processes, mainly conceptual but
often ascribed to the nervous system. The processes were not
directly observed and seemed therefore to require hypotheses and
deductions, but the facts were observable. Only so long as a
generalization gradient, for example, remained a hypothetical
feature of an inner process was it necessary to determine its shape
by making hypotheses and conﬁrming or disproving theorems
derived from them. When gradients began to be directly observed,
the hypothetico-deductive procedures became irrelevant.
Cognitive psychologists have promoted the survival of another
inaccessible world to which deductive methods seem appropriate.
An introspectionist may claim to observe some of the products and
by-products of mental processes, but the processes themselves
are not directly perceived, and statements about them are
therefore hypothetical. The Freudian mental apparatus has also
required a deductive approach, as have the traits, abilities, and
factors derived from “mental measurements.” We can avoid
hypothetico-deductive methods in all these fields by formulating the
data without reference to cognitive processes, mental apparatuses,
or traits. Many physiological explanations of behavior seem at the
moment to call for hypotheses, but the future lies with techniques
of direct observation which will make them unnecessary (see
Chapter 9).
Some of the questions to which a different kind of theory may be
addressed are as follows: what aspects of behavior are signiﬁcant?
Of what variables are changes in these aspects a function? How
are the relations among behavior and its controlling variables to be
brought together in characterizing an organism as a system? What
methods are appropriate in studying such a system experimentally?
Under what conditions does such an analysis yield a technology of
behavior and what issues arise in its application? These are not
questions to which a hypothetico-deductive method is appropriate.
They are nevertheless important questions, for the future of a
science of behavior depends upon the answers.
B.F.S.

Contents
I Contingencies of reinforcement and the design of cultures

1 The role of the environment
Notes:
1.1 Some contingencies of reinforcement
1.2 From “stimulus and response” to “contingencies of
reinforcement”

2 Utopia as an experimental culture
3 The environmental solution
Notes:
3.1 Needs
3.2 The problem of leisure
II An analysis of ontogenic and phylogenic contingencies

4 The experimental analysis of behavior
Notes:
4.1 Independent variables
4.2 The dependent variable
4.3 Significance
4.4 Progress
4.5 A technology of behavior
4.6 The critics

5 Operant behavior
Notes:
5.1 Purpose
5.2 The definition of an operant
5.3 Class versus instance

6 An operant analysis of problem solving
Notes:
6.1 Why are rules formulated?

6.2 The objectivity of rules
6.3 Some kinds of rules
6.4 Differences between rule-governed and contingencyshaped behavior

7 The phylogeny and ontogeny of behavior
Notes:
7.1 Nature or nurture?
7.2 Species-specific behavior
7.3 Interrelations among phylogenic and ontogenic variables
7.4 Aggression
7.5 A possible source of programmed phylogenic
contingencies
III A critique of alternative theories

8 Behaviorism at fifty
Notes:
8.1 Private stimuli
8.2 Awareness
8.3 Mind and matter
8.4 The copy theory
8.5 The behavior of seeing
8.6 Way stations
8.7 Feelings
8.8 The invasion of privacy
8.9 Behavior and performance
8.10 The geography of the mind
8.11 The death of behaviorism

9 The inside story
References
Acknowledgments
Index

I

CONTINGENCIES OF REINFORCEMENT AND THE
DESIGN OF CULTURES

1

The role of the environment

The environment was once thought of simply as the place in which
animals and men lived and behaved. They may have behaved in
different ways in different places, but not because the places were
different. The environment was a necessary setting, which perhaps
favored or hindered behavior but did not determine its occurrence
or form. It was not until the seventeenth century that a more active
role was suggested by Descartes in his anticipation of the reﬂex,
and it was not until the nineteenth century that reﬂexes were
isolated and studied. Physiologists then began to call the action of
the environment a stimulus, the Latin for “goad.” The term acquired
further meaning as reﬂexes were discovered and studied, and its
scope was extended when Pavlov showed how new stimuli could
be conditioned. The discovery of tropisms lent support, particularly
in the writings of Jacques Loeb, to the view that the environment
somehow or other forced the organism to behave.
Such was the background against which stimulus-response
psychology was born. John B. Watson adopted the principle of the
conditioned reﬂex and added it to the older notion of habit. He
contended that animals and men acquired new behavior through
conditioning and then went on behaving as long as appropriate
stimuli were active. The position was systematically developed by
Clark Hull (71). E. B. Holt summarized it this way: “We are really
prodded or lashed through life” (70). But it was not easy to show
that this was true of all behavior. Plausible stimuli could not be
found for all responses, and some relevant environmental
conditions, such as a shortage of food, did not act like stimuli. The
original concept was soon replaced by something much less
precise called the “total stimulus situation.” Equally troublesome
was the fact that many stimuli which obviously reached the surface
of the organism seemed to have no effect. A new kind of stimulus
was therefore invented; it was called a cue, and it had the curious
property of being effective only when the organism needed it.
(Ethologists solve a similar problem in the same way when they
attribute unlearned behavior to “releasers,” stimuli which act only
when the organism is ready to respond.)
This was patchwork, designed to salvage the stimulus-response
formula, and it had the effect of moving the determination of

behavior back into the organism. When external stimuli could not
be found, internal had to be invented. If a shortage of food was
not itself a stimulus, it could at least generate a “drive” which
prodded the organism from within. (Hunger pangs seemed to
conﬁrm this view, but comparable stimulation from swollen seminal
vesicles, which Watson thought might explain sexual behavior, was
less plausible.) Emotional variables led to the invention of other
inner stimuli; fear, for example, became an acquired drive. Even
instincts became stimuli, a view supported curiously enough by
Freud.
Inner processes and mechanisms also had to be invented. If a
conspicuous stimulus seemed to have no effect, it was because a
central gatekeeper—a sort of Maxwell’s demon—had refused to let
it enter. When the organism seemed to behave appropriately with
respect to stimuli which had long since disappeared, it was said to
be responding to copies of those stimuli which it had stored in its
memory. Many of these central activities were only thinly disguised
versions of the mental processes which stimulus-response
psychology had vowed to dispossess. Indeed, they continued to
be called mental (or, as the fashion changed, cognitive) in a similar
formulation derived from information theory. Let input stand for
stimulus and output for response, and certain dimensional
problems are simpliﬁed. This is promising but not promising
enough, because central processes are still needed. Output
follows input only when input has been “selected,” “transformed,”
“stored,” “retrieved,” and so on.

Beyond stimulus and response
Every stimulus-response or input-output formulation of behavior
suffers from a serious omission. No account of the interchange
between organism and environment is complete until it includes the
action of the environment upon the organism after a response has
been made. The fact that behavior might have important
consequences had not, of course, gone unnoticed. The
philosophy of hedonism insisted that men worked to achieve
pleasure and avoid pain, and utilitarianism tried to justify behavior
in terms of its useful effects. Evolutionary theory pointed to the
resulting adaptation or adjustment of the organism to the
environment. Nevertheless, the full signiﬁcance of consequences
was only slowly recognized. Possibly there was some uneasiness

about ﬁnal causes (How could something which followed behavior
have an effect on it?), but a major difﬁculty lay in the facts. There
were embarrassing exceptions to all these rules. Men sometimes
act in ways which bring pain and destroy pleasure, have a
questionable net utility, and work against the survival of the
species. Rewards and punishments do not always have predictable
effects. Though we may know how much a person is paid, we
cannot tell how hard he will work. Though we may know that the
parents of one child respond to him with affection and those of
another with the disciplinary measures of a martinet, we cannot tell
which child will conform and which rebel. Though we may know that
one government is tyrannical and another benevolent, we cannot
predict which people will submit and which revolt. Many efforts have
been made to explain failures of this sort—for example, by
inventing other kinds of pleasures and pains—but they have never
succeeded in preserving confidence in the basic principles.
A more reassuring order began to emerge when the temporal
relation between behavior and its consequences was scrutinized.
In Edward L. Thorndike’s famous experiment, a hungry cat
conﬁned in a box could turn a latch and open a door; it could then
escape from the box and reach food lying outside. Several
features of this arrangement are worth noting. Escape from a box
and access to food are more sharply speciﬁed than any net gain or
ultimate advantage, and they follow immediately upon turning the
latch. Indeed, they may coincide with traces of that response, in
which case the issue of final causes can be avoided.
What Thorndike observed was that the behavior of turning the
latch was, as he said, “stamped in.” He could plot a learning curve
showing how the cat came to turn the latch more and more quickly
as the experiment was repeated. He did not need to assume that
the response itself was in any way strengthened. It might have
occurred more quickly just because other behavior in the box was
“stamped out.” A successful response could be selected by its
consequences very much as a mutation was said to be selected by
its contribution to survival in evolutionary theory. (This interpretation
of the selective effect of consequences continued to be
maintained by Edwin R. Guthrie.)
A further simpliﬁcation of the experiment clariﬁes the process. A
box in which a hungry rat depresses a lever and immediately
obtains food is clearly in the Thorndike tradition. The response is
simpler, however, and the consequence is immediately contingent

upon it, at least if a conditioned reinforcer such as the sound of the
food dispenser has been set up. But there is a more important
feature: by thoroughly adapting the rat to the box before the lever
is made available, most of the competing behavior can be
“stamped out” before the response to be learned is ever emitted.
Thorndike’s learning curve, showing the gradual disappearance of
unsuccessful behavior, then vanishes. In its place we are left with a
conspicuous change in the successful response itself: an
immediate, often quite abrupt, increase in rate (129).
By using rate of responding as a dependent variable, it has
been possible to formulate the interaction between an organism
and its environment more adequately. The kinds of consequences
which increase the rate (“reinforcers”) are positive or negative,
depending upon whether they reinforce when they appear or when
they disappear. The class of responses upon which a reinforcer is
contingent is called an operant, to suggest the action on the
environment followed by reinforcement. We construct an operant
by making a reinforcer contingent on a response, but the important
fact about the resulting unit is not its topography but its probability
of occurrence, observed as rate of emission. Prior stimuli are not
irrelevant. Any stimulus present when an operant is reinforced
acquires control in the sense that the rate will be higher when it is
present. Such a stimulus does not act as a goad; it does not elicit
the response in the sense of forcing it to occur. It is simply an
essential aspect of the occasion upon which a response is made
and reinforced. The difference is made clear by calling it a
discriminative stimulus (or S D).
An adequate formulation of the interaction between an organism
and its environment must always specify three things: (1) the
occasion upon which a response occurs, (2) the response itself,
and (3) the reinforcing consequences. The interrelationships
among them are the “contingencies of reinforcement.” The concept
characterizes an aspect of the environment which Tolman and
Brunswik may have been trying to identify when they spoke of its
“causal texture” (160). The interrelationships are much more
complex than those between a stimulus and a response, and they
are much more productive in both theoretical and experimental
analyses. The behavior generated by a given set of contingencies
can be accounted for without appealing to hypothetical inner
states or processes. If a conspicuous stimulus does not have an

effect, it is not because the organism has not attended to it or
because some central gatekeeper has screened it out, but
because the stimulus plays no important role in the prevailing
contingencies.1 The other cognitive processes invoked to salvage
an input-output formula can be disposed of in the same way.
In a laboratory for the study of operant behavior, contingencies
of reinforcement are deliberately arranged and their effects
observed. The experimental space contains various controllable
stimuli, one or more operanda which report responses, and one or
more means of reinforcement. Speciﬁc interrelations among these
things are maintained by relays, timers, counters, rate analyzers,
and so on. (The development of this equipment during the past
twenty-ﬁve years is a fair record of the increasing complexity of the
contingencies which have been submitted to analysis.) The
behavior is usually recorded in a cumulative record because rate
and changes in rate over substantial periods of time can then be
seen at a glance, but further details are commonly clariﬁed by
analyzing interresponse times. Some contingencies require on-line
computer processing of the behavior. With the help of such
equipment, together with the experimental techniques for which it is
designed, we have begun to see contingencies of reinforcement.
It is hard to see them in any other way. Suppose we ask an
observer who knows nothing about the analysis of behavior to look
into a typical experimental space when an experiment is in
progress. He sees a pigeon, let us say, occasionally pecking one
of several colored disks on a wall, and he may note that it pecks at
different rates on different disks. The colors of the disks change
from time to time, and a change is perhaps followed by a
noticeable change in rate. A food dispenser occasionally operates
and the pigeon eats, and our observer infers (possibly wrongly)
that it has recently gone without food. The food dispenser usually
operates just after a response has been made, but not necessarily
after a response to a disk of a given color and in any case only
very infrequently.
Our observer will ﬁnd it hard to make any sense of these
scattered facts. He has observed a behaving organism from what
appears to be an almost ideal vantage point. Over a substantial
period of time he has seen various stimuli, responses, and
reinforcers appear and disappear. The fact remains that direct
observation, no matter how prolonged, tells him very little about

what is going on. He will be quite unprepared for the additional
information to be found in a simple cumulative record, where for the
ﬁrst time he can estimate rate of responding accurately, compare
different rates, and follow the accelerations which are now obvious.
He has had, of course, none of the information about the recent
history of the pigeon to be found in the log of the experiment.
Above all, he could only vaguely have surmised the
interdependencies among stimuli, responses, and reinforcers which
he can now discover by examining the controlling equipment.
When we recall how long it took to recognize the causal action of
the environment in the simple reﬂex, we should perhaps not be
surprised that it has taken us much longer to see contingencies of
reinforcement. The traditional homocentric view of human behavior
discourages us from looking at the environment in this light, and
the facts themselves are far from obvious. And now let us ask our
observer to look at the environment at large, where animals and
men are living and behaving under contingencies vastly more
complex than any which have ever been submitted to experimental
analysis. If he could not see what was happening in a relatively
simple experimental space, how can we expect him to understand
the behavior he sees in the world around him? And everyone has
been in his position until very recently!
It is only when we have analyzed behavior under known
contingencies of reinforcement that we can begin to see what is
happening in daily life. Things we once overlooked then begin to
command our attention, and things which once attracted our
attention we learn to discount or ignore. Topography of behavior,
no matter how fascinating, then takes second place to evidences
of probability. A stimulus is no longer merely the conspicuous onset
or termination of an energy exchange, as in reﬂex physiology; it is
any part of the occasion on which a response is emitted and
reinforced. Reinforcement is much more than “being rewarded”; a
prevailing probability of reinforcement, particularly under various
intermittent schedules, is the important variable. In other words, we
no longer look at behavior and environment as separate things or
events but at the interrelations among them. We look at the
contingencies of reinforcement. We can then interpret behavior
more successfully.
The principles of hedonism, utilitarianism, and adaptation were
not wrong, they were simply not precise. It is true that men work for
money and affection and to avoid the whip and that they pursue

happiness and seek relief from pain. At a comparable level, it is
true that water boils when heated, freezes when chilled, runs down
hill, and soaks into a sponge. These are all observed facts. They
have their practical uses and are important in the early stages of a
science, but science quickly moves on to a much more precise
analysis, and an effective technology must do the same.

The interpretation of behavior
Verbal behavior is a ﬁeld in which the concept of contingencies of
reinforcement has proved particularly useful. The conspicuous
thing in the ﬁeld is the behavior of people speaking, or rather its
audible products. Most linguists accept this as their subject matter:
a language is the totality of the sentences spoken in it. Speech is
said, noncommittally, to be a matter of “utterances.” Samples can
be obtained for study from anyone who speaks the language,
possibly the linguist himself. The topography of the behavior is
analyzed acoustically, phonetically, and phonemically and in those
larger grammatical and syntactical structures called sentences. The
environment is not ignored, of course. In fact, phonemes and
acceptable sentences cannot be deﬁned simply as features of
topography because they involve effects upon a listener. The
environment is what sentences are “about,” but the relation alluded
to with the word “about” is usually not analyzed beyond the level of
meaning or reference. The meaning of an utterance is either some
feature of the occasion upon which it is uttered or some effect
upon a listener. The relation of speaker to listener is described in
one of the simplest versions of an input-output formula, in which
the speaker transmits information to the listener or communicates
with him in the sense of making something common to them both.
Given these restrictions, it is not surprising that linguists and
psycholinguists have failed to explain why men speak at all, say
what they say, or say it in given ways. Nor is it surprising that they
have turned to mental precursors. A speaker uses a word because
he has the intention of expressing a meaning. He composes a
sentence (in part by applying possibly innate syntactical rules) to
express an idea or proposition. The structure of a language is said
to reﬂect the structure of thought. This sort of psychologizing was
wisely rejected by linguists in the early years of the century, but
efforts to ﬁnd a behavioral alternative, particularly by Leonard
Bloomﬁeld (21), failed because of the shortcomings of stimulus-

response psychology. The result was either a pure structuralism or
a return to mentalistic explanations such as those of generative
grammarians.
The concept of contingencies of reinforcement leads to a much
more useful formulation. A language is not the words or sentences
“spoken in it”; it is the “it” in which they are spoken—the practices of
the verbal community which shape and maintain the behavior of
speakers. Verbal contingencies have the same status as
contingencies maintained by laboratory equipment, but they
involve the behavior of a second organism, the listener, and the
behavior they generate
therefore
has many unusual
characteristics. It is the contingencies which prevail in a given
verbal community which “generate sentences.” They shape and
maintain the phonemic and syntactical properties of verbal
behavior and account for a wide range of functional characteristics
—from poetry to logic. They do so without the help of the mind of
speaker or listener (141). No analysis of the mere structure of
speech or language can do any of this, even when supplemented
with an input-output formulation.
Structural linguistics is only one example of the movement in
ethnology, anthropology, and sociology represented most clearly in
the work of Claude Lévi-Strauss (89). It is concerned with the
conspicuous thing about a culture: what the people in it are doing.
Men have always been intrigued by customs and manners,
especially in cultures which differ greatly from their own. They have
reported the ways in which other people live—their family life, their
kinship systems, their technologies, their social practices, and so
on. They report such facts simply as such, or analyze their
structure, or collect and compare different structures. Sartre has
criticized the result as “static,” but it is not movement which is
lacking but function. Eventually we must ask why people behave in
their respective ways. It is not enough to say that a custom is
followed simply because it is customary to follow it. Nor is it enough
to say that people behave as they do because of the ways in
which they think. To understand the behavior of savages, we must
do more than understand the “savage mind.”
Malinowski was among the ﬁrst to contend that customs are
followed because of their consequences, and we can now
formulate this functional position in a more comprehensive way. A
culture is not the behavior of the people “living in it”; it is the “it” in
which they live—the contingencies of social reinforcement which

generate and sustain their behavior. (The contingencies are
maintained by other members of the group, whose behavior in
maintaining them is the product of earlier contingencies, just as the
behavior of the listener in shaping and maintaining the behavior of
the speaker is the product of earlier contingencies in the verbal
community.) To record what the people in a culture do is an
important step—but only a ﬁrst step—in discovering why they do it.
Rules which have been extracted from the contingencies, and
used in maintaining them (see Chapter 6), are helpful to those who
study a culture, but they usually represent only the more obvious
contingencies. More subtle contingencies may go unsuspected for
a long time. They are nevertheless the principal subject matter of
anthropology and sociology.
A comparable movement in political science is called
“behavioralism.” It also represents an understandable reaction to
premature psychologizing. The “behavioralist” conﬁnes himself to
those aspects of the topography of political behavior which can be
measured with empirical tools and techniques. It is not surprising
that a symposium on “The limits of behavioralism in political
scie n ce ” (35) should complain of the neglect of subjective
experience, ideas, motives, feelings, attitudes, and so on. They are
indeed neglected, but it does not follow that the political scientist
should return to them. It is true that political behavior cannot be
understood simply in terms of its topography, as behavioralism
seems to imply, but what is needed is not a mentalistic explanation
but a further analysis of political contingencies of reinforcement.

The manipulation of behavior
When the variables discovered in an experimental analysis prove to
be manipulable, we can move beyond interpretation to the control
of behavior. Practical control is already a commonplace in the
operant laboratory, where behavior is frequently manufactured to
speciﬁcations and changed almost at will. Topography is shaped
and maintained; rate of responding is increased or decreased;
stimuli are brought into control; and complex patterns and
sequences of response are constructed. Thus, if we are interested
in vision, we set up contingencies which guarantee that an
organism will look at a stimulus at a given time. If we are interested
in emotion, we generate a standard baseline against which speciﬁc
effects are likely to be seen. If we are interested in obesity, we

arrange special contingencies under which an organism grossly
overeats. If we are interested in sleep, we arrange contingencies
which keep an organism awake for long periods of time, at the end
of which it immediately sleeps. If we are interested in the nervous
system, we set up standard patterns of behavior which are altered
by lesions or central stimulation. If we are interested in new
pharmaceutical compounds, we generate behavior which is
affected by specific drugs in specific ways.
All these practices have a bearing on the control of human
behavior in the world at large, which is, of course, vastly more
important. Traditional techniques of control suffer from the
shortcomings of the theories upon which they were based. They
overemphasize conspicuous things—the topography of behavior
rather than its probability and independent variables which have
immediate and obvious effects. The concept of contingencies of
reinforcement has led to a much more effective technology of
behavior, a few examples of which may be cited.
Education. The topography of a student’s behavior is the
clearest evidence that he knows something, and it has always
been overemphasized. In classical Greek and Chinese education
boys were taught to recite long passages from great literary works,
and when they could do so, there was no question that the
teacher had been effective. We no longer require much literal
recitation, but our concern for the right answer is in the same vein.
Since the teacher is reinforced when the student responds
correctly, he is likely to employ techniques which induce him to do
so, but the probability that he will respond in similar ways in the
future (“will use what he knows”) is neglected (152).
Teachers have traditionally used only the most conspicuous
environmental measures. The birch rod and the cane mark a long
history of aversive control, which has not yet come to an end. Most
students still study, recite, and take examinations primarily to avoid
the consequences of not doing so. The consequences may have
been moderated, but they are nevertheless aversive enough to
have troublesome by-products. Simple permissiveness is not an
effective alternative, and it is hard to make contrived positive
reinforcers such as good marks, grades, diplomas, and prizes
contingent on behavior in effective ways.
Teaching is the arrangement of contingencies of reinforcement
which expedite learning. A student learns without being taught, but

he learns more effectively under favorable conditions. Teachers
have always arranged effective contingencies when they have
taught successfully, but they are more likely to do so if they
understand what they are doing. Programmed instruction is a
technique taken directly from the operant laboratory, and it is
designed to maximize the reinforcement associated with successful
control of the environment. A program is a set of contingencies
which shape topography of response and bring behavior under the
control of stimuli in an expeditious way. An equally important
advance is the arrangement of contingencies of reinforcement in
the classroom which take over the function of “discipline.”
Psychotherapy. The often bizarre behavior of the psychotic
naturally attracts attention. Whether it is taken as the disorder to be
treated or as the sympom of an underlying disorder of another
kind, it is scrutinized for “signiﬁcances.” Meaning is sought in the
gestures of the psychotic or in the self-destructive behavior of the
autistic child. The important thing about a psychotic, however, is
not what he is doing but what he is not doing. The behavior he
exhibits is “abnormal” just because it is not characteristic of the
situation. It might not be observed at all if normal behavior were
stronger. The problem is not to ﬁnd in the structure of the observed
behavior some hint as to how it may be made to disappear, but
rather to build up the behavior which is missing.
Traditional measures have been perhaps even more aversive
than in education. Some of the more extreme forms arose from
theories of demoniac possession; others were simply intensiﬁed
versions of everyday practices in suppressing unwanted behavior.
The by-products to be expected of aversive control have caused
trouble, and many reforms have been proposed. Simple
permissiveness is seldom feasible, and personal reinforcers, such
as genuine or synthetic affection, are hard to make contingent on
desired behavior.
When the psychotic shows an insensitivity to normal
contingencies of reinforcement, an environment must be designed
to which he is likely to respond. Ogden R. Lindsley has called such
an environment “prosthetic” (92). In the “token economies” used in
ward management, for example, special reinforcers are conditioned
conspicuous contingencies. A token has a clear-cut physical
status, it becomes a powerful conditioned reinforcer when

exchanged for other reinforcers, and it can be made immediately
contingent on desired behavior.
It is not always the psychotic’s sensitivity to contingencies but the
contingencies themselves which may be discovered to be
defective. A well-known experiment in ward management by Ayllon
and Haughton (7) shows how such contingencies can be improved.
Several attendants had been needed to get thirty schizophrenic
women into the dining room at mealtime, and it had taken them
thirty minutes to do so. The contingencies were than changed. The
attendants were not to make any effort to move the patients. Any
patient who entered the dining room within half an hour after a bell
had sounded could eat, but the others went without food, and no
other food was available. At the ﬁrst meal only a few patients
reached the dining room, but eventually they all did so. The
allowable time was then progressively shortened from a half hour to
ﬁve minutes. At the end of the experiment all the patients went to
the dining room within ﬁve minutes without help from the
attendants.
The experiment illustrates several important points in the
interpretation and manipulation of contingencies of reinforcement.
In a ward of this sort the personal attention of an attendant is
usually a strong reinforcer, but it is often contingent only on mild
troublemaking. (Serious troublemaking is dealt with in other ways.)
During most of the day, the attendant can avoid reinforcing
patients when they make trouble by ignoring them, but this is not
possible when he is responsible for getting them into the dining
room. In effect, the dinner bell gave the patients a special power:
they could now evoke reactions in the attendants by refusing to
move, moving in the wrong direction, and so on. When the
contingencies were changed, these behaviors were no longer
reinforced, and a new reinforcer could then come into play.
Institutional food is not always reinforcing, but it becomes so when
the patient is hungry. The patients began to move toward the
dining room not to avoid or escape from the mildly aversive action
of the attendants, but because they were positively reinforced by
food. Once it was established, the behavior did not require a
special level of deprivation. It would be more likely to be classiﬁed
as acceptable behavior in the culture at large. The experiment is
not, of course, a solution to all the problems of ward management,
but it shows how a change in contingencies can solve some
problems and even lead to a sort of therapy.

Economics. The behavior of an employee is important to the
employer, who gains when the employee works industriously and
carefully. How is he to be induced to do so? The standard answer
was once physical force: men worked to avoid punishment or
death. The by-products were troublesome, however, and
economics is perhaps the ﬁrst ﬁeld in which an explicit change was
made to positive reinforcement. Most men now work, as we say,
“for money.” But many problems survive, and they have parallels in
the operant laboratory.
Money is not a natural reinforcer; it must be conditioned as such.
Delayed reinforcement, as in a weekly wage, raises a special
problem. No one works on Monday morning because he is
reinforced by a paycheck on Friday afternoon. The employee who
is paid by the week works during the week to avoid losing the
standard of living which depends on a weekly wage. A supervisor
who can discharge him is an essential part of the system. Rate of
work is determined by the supervisor (with or without the pacing
stimuli of a production line), and special aversive contingencies
maintain quality. The pattern is therefore still aversive. It has often
been pointed out that the attitude of the production-line worker
toward his work differs conspicuously from that of the craftsman,
who is envied by workers and industrial managers alike. One
explanation is that the craftsman is reinforced by more than
monetary consequences, but another important difference is that
when a craftsman spends a week in completing a given object,
each of the parts produced during the week is likely to be
automatically reinforcing because of its place in the completed
object.
Somewhat better contingencies are available under schedules of
reinforcement based on counters rather than clocks. In piece-rate
pay, the worker is paid for each item he produces. This is a socalled ﬁxed-ratio schedule, and it generates a high level of activity.
Piece-rate reinforcement is, indeed, so powerful that it has often
been misused, and it is generally opposed by those concerned
with the welfare of the worker (and by workers themselves when,
for example, they set daily quotas). A salesman on salary and
commission exempliﬁes a form of incentive wage which is a
combination of schedules based on clocks and counters. Incentive
wages are currently not in favor, possibly because they have also

been misused, but they need to be investigated as promising
alternatives to aversive control.
A particularly effective schedule is at the heart of all gambling
devices. Consider a room full of people playing Bingo. The players
sit quietly for many hours; they listen with great care as numbers
and letters are called out; they arrange markers on cards rapidly
and accurately; and they respond instantly when a particular
pattern has been completed. What would industry not give for
workers who behaved that way? And what would workers not give
for work which absorbed them so completely? (The craftsman, by
the way, is strongly under the control of ratio schedules.)
Other economic contingencies induce men to buy and sell, rent
and hire, lend and borrow, prospect, invent, promote, and so on.
The strength of a culture depends substantially upon the results,
and it is no accident that we ask some basic questions about
cultures in terms of their economic contingencies. Yet the
distinguishing features of capitalism, socialism, communism, and
other economic systems are more often traceable to geography,
natural resources, forms of government, and political theories than
to a technology based on a scientiﬁc analysis of economic
behavior. The wealth of a culture depends upon the productive
behavior of its members. It is a natural resource which is shamefully
neglected because a true economic technology has yet to be
devised. The basic principles are available in an experimental
analysis of behavior.
Government. Governments are especially committed to aversive
practices. At one time the State could be deﬁned as the power to
punish. The possibility of positive reinforcement was ignored. It is
true that Gulliver found an exception in Lilliput, where “whoever can
bring sufﬁcient proof that he has strictly observed the laws of his
country for seventy-three moons, hath a claim to certain privileges,
according to his quality and condition of life, with a proportionable
sum of money out of a fund appropriated for that use,” but that
was ﬁction—and it has not yet come true. Modern governments
manipulate vast quantities of positive as well as negative
reinforcers, but they seriously neglect the contingencies in both
cases. The behavior to be reinforced is seldom deﬁned, in either
domestic or international affairs. Most governmental decisions still
rest on historical analogies and personal experiences formulated in
mentalistic ways. Wars, we are told by UNESCO, begin in the minds

of men. A particularly unfortunate war is said to be the result of
“misperception” (166). Violence in the streets is attributed to
“frustration.” This is dangerous psychologizing. It is no doubt
difﬁcult to arrange contingencies of reinforcement to solve
problems of this magnitude, for decisions must often be made,
here as elsewhere, without adequate information, but unscientiﬁc
thinking is not the solution. Political action is always a matter of
manipulating
contingencies
of
reinforcement,
and
an
understanding of contingencies and their effects could bring a
dramatic improvement.
Daily life. The techniques of education, psychotherapy,
economics, and government are all found in miniature in daily life.
The members of a group teach each other, make each other’s
environments easier to live in, induce each other to work and
exchange goods, and maintain ethical and moral sanctions which
have the effect of governmental measures. They do so, of course,
by arranging various contingencies of reinforcement, which are the
proper subject matter of anthropology and sociology. It is a difﬁcult
ﬁeld, in part because the practices are less likely to be codiﬁed
than in other disciplines, and in part because there is no controlling
ﬁgure—such as a teacher, therapist, employer, or governor whose
behavior would make uncodified practices visible.
Daily life is sometimes explicitly designed, however. The religious
communities in the Judeo-Christian tradition were based on sets of
rules (e.g., the Rules of Benedict and Augustine) specifying
contingencies of social reinforcement. Schools and colleges are to
some extent communities in this sense and have their own rules.
Institutions for the care of psychotics and retardates, orphanages,
summer camps, and penal institutions are other examples. The
techniques of control, codiﬁed or uncodiﬁed, are often aversive;
but efforts have recently been made to design communities of
these sorts using positive contingencies.
An experiment in the National Training School for Boys in
Washington, D. C., the students of which are juvenile delinquents,
is an example. The culture of that community was redesigned in
the following way (38). Aversive control was minimized; no boy was
required to do anything. A boy might, if he wished, “go on relief”;
he could eat nutritious if uninteresting food, sleep on a pad in a
dormitory, and spend each day sitting on a bench. He could greatly
improve his way of life, however, by earning points exchangeable

for more interesting food, a private room, a television set,
admission to the game room, a trip away from the institution, and
so on. Points could be earned by working in the kitchen or by
performing janitorial services, but most readily by studying and
learning. Right answers were worth points.
One result, important to management, was improved morale. The
boys performed useful services and behaved well with respect to
each other without aversive control and hence without its
unwanted by-products. A more important result was related to the
avowed purpose of the institution. Most juvenile delinquents have
been conspicuous failures in school. They have been persuaded
that they are dull or stupid. Under the powerful educational
contingencies arranged in the training school, the boys discovered
that they could learn and in many cases learn rapidly. In doing so,
they acquired behavior which would prove useful when they left the
school and which would therefore increase the chances that they
would behave in acceptable rather than illegal ways.
Compared with education, psychotherapy, economics, and
government, very little thought has been given to the explicit
design of daily life. The exception is the so-called utopian literature.
Utopian writers have been concerned with the social environment
and with the possibility of redesigning it. Whether they have known
it or not, they have been concerned with the contingencies of
reinforcement under which men live. They have been limited by the
theories of human conduct with which they were familiar; but as our
understanding improves, it should be possible to suggest better
versions. Basic science always leads eventually to an improved
technology, and a science of behavior is no exception. It should
supply a technology of behavior appropriate to the ultimate utopian
goal: an effective culture.

Note 1.1

Some contingencies of reinforcement

A few contingencies which have been studied experimentally may
be roughly described as follows. An experimental space contains
one or more operanda such as a lever projecting from a wall which
may be pressed by a rat or a translucent disk on the wall which
may be pecked by a pigeon, various sources of stimuli such as
sounds and lights, and reinforcing devices such as a food or water
dispenser or a source of aversive stimulation such as a bright light

or an electric grid to deliver shocks. Any stimulus arising from the
space, the operandum, or special stimulating devices prior to a
response is designated “S D.” A response, such as pressing the
lever or pressing the disk, is “R.” Food presented to a hungry
organism is a positive reinforcer (“S rein“), a bright light or shock a
negative reinforcer. The interrelations among S D, R, and S rein
compose the contingencies of reinforcement. All three terms must
be specified.
(1) Operant reinforcement. A hungry rat presses the lever and
receives food. (Frequency of pressing increases.) A pigeon pecks
the disk and receives food. (Frequency of pecking increases.)
(2 ) Escape. The experimental space is brightly lighted. A rat
presses the lever and reduces the intensity of the light. (The lever
is then pressed more quickly when the light appears, or more often
in sustained light.)
(3 ) Avoidance. A rat is shocked every twenty seconds except
that a response to the lever postpones the next shock for twenty
seconds. (Frequency of response increases and many shocks are
avoided.)
(4) Stimulus discrimination. A rat presses the lever and obtains
food when a light is on, but no food follows the response when the
light is off. (Frequency of responding is higher in the presence of
the light than in its absence—“S Δ.”)
(5) Response differentiation. Food appears only when the lever
is depressed with a force above a given value. (Responses
showing the required force appear more frequently.)
( 6 ) “Superstition.” The food dispenser operates every twenty
seconds regardless of the behavior of the rat. (Any behavior
occurring just before the appearance of the food is reinforced, and
similar coincidences become more likely as the behavior is
strengthened. The rat develops a “superstitious ritual.”)
(7) Chained operants. Pecking a green disk changes the color to
red, and pecking the red disk is followed by food. (The frequency
of occurrence of the chain of responses increases.)
(8) Observation. A discrimination is set up under which a pigeon
pecks a red disk but not a green. The color slowly fades, however,
until a discrimination becomes impossible. Pecking another disk
reverses the fading. (The pigeon pecks the other disk to produce
enough color to make a discrimination.)
(9) Matching to sample. Three disks are arranged in a row. The

middle disk is either red or green, the other two unlighted. A
response to the middle disk lights the side disks, one red and one
green. A response to the matching disk is reinforced with food.
(Responses to the matching disk increase in frequency.)
(10) Delayed matching. As in (9) but the middle disk is darkened
before the side keys are illuminated. (If the side keys are presented
immediately, the pigeon is able to match. A short delay makes
matching impossible. “The pigeon cannot remember the color of
the middle key.”)
(11 ) Mediated delayed matching. There are ﬁve disks—one in
the center and the others within easy reach at the four points of
the compass. Center is either red or green. A response darkens it
and projects white light on North and South. If Center was red, a
response to North illuminates East and West, one red and one
green. A response to the matching disk is reinforced. If Center was
green, a response to South illuminates East and West, and a
matching response is reinforced. Two chains are thus set up: (i)
The pigeon pecks Center red, North white, and red on either East
or West; (ii) The pigeon pecks Center green, South white, and
green on East or West. The pigeon matches successfully because
it responds to the red on East or West when it has just responded
to North and to the green on East or West when it has just
responded to South. Responding on North and South can then be
protracted—for example, by requiring a number of responses to
illuminate East and West. The number can be greatly increased. A
long delayed matching response to East or West is mediated by
the stimuli generated by responding to North or South.
( 1 2 ) Schedules of reinforcement. Reinforcements may be
scheduled in many ways. Each schedule, with given values of the
parameters, generates a characteristic performance.
a. Fixed interval. A response is reinforced only when it
occurs after the passage of a period of time (for example, ﬁve
minutes). Another period begins immediately after reinforcement.
b. A fixed ratio. Every nth response is reinforced.
c. Variable interval or ratio. The interval or number in a. and
b. need not be ﬁxed but may vary over a given range around some
average value.
d. Multiple schedules. One schedule is in force in the
presence of one stimulus, a different schedule in the presence of
another stimulus. For example, a ﬁxed interval prevails when the

key is red, and a variable issue when the key is green. (A
characteristic performance is obtained under each stimulus.)
e. Differential reinforcement of rate of responding. A
response is reinforced only if it follows the preceding response after
a speciﬁed interval of time (DRL) or before the end of a given
interval (DRH). In DRL the interval might be, for example, 3
minutes; in DRH, one half second.
(13) Multiple deprivation. Pecking one disk is reinforced by food,
pecking another disk is reinforced by water, pecking a third disk is
reinforced with either food or water at random. Under different
conditions of hunger and thirst the rate of responding on the third
disk is the average of the rates on the first two.
Some contingencies in the field of verbal behavior are as follows:
(1 4 ) “Mand.” In the presence of a listener (S D), the response
Water is reinforced when the listener gives the speaker water.
(15) Echoic behavior. When someone says Water, the speaker
says Water, and reinforcement is contingent on the similarity of the
two sounds.
(16) Textual behavior. When looking at the printed word Water,
the speaker is reinforced if he says Water.
(1 7 ) Intraverbal behavior. Upon hearing or reading the word
Water, the speaker is reinforced if he emits a thematically related
response such as Ice or Faucet.
(18) “Tact.” In the presence of a glass of water, a river, rain, and
so on, the speaker is reinforced when he says Water.

Note 1.2

From “stimulus and response” to “contingencies of
reinforcement”

It was a long and difﬁcult transition. The consequences of behavior
were ﬁrst treated simply as stimuli eliciting other responses.
Complex acts were analyzed as chain reﬂexes. Each link was
described as it occurred, to give some assurance of the physical
status of the complete act. A stimulus was connected to a
response which followed via the nervous system, and the response
was connected with a subsequent stimulus via the environment.
Beyond the presumption of reﬂex action, no effect on the
probability of the response was implied (except by Guthrie, who
argued that the second stimulus terminated the response,
permitting it to form a stronger association with the first stimulus).

A possible effect of a stimulus upon the response which
produced it was recognized in the theory of the circular reﬂex,
deﬁned by Warren (163) as “a reﬂex in which the response serves
to renew the original stimulus.” The function of this “reafferentation”
was closer to guidance than to reinforcement, and guidance was
later to assume a more important role in Wiener’s cybernetics,
where response-produced stimuli appear as “feedback,” a term
widely misused as a synonym for operant reinforcement. P. K.
Anokhin (4) has recently attempted to analyze the effects of “the
results of action” in terms of feedback or “inverse afferentation.”1
In the experimental arrangement of Miller and Konorski (101) a
consequence was explicitly added to a reﬂex. A tone was
sounded, the leg of a hungry dog was ﬂexed, reﬂexly or passively,
and food was presented. Eventually, “the tone alone elicited the
movement.” Miller and Konorski offered the following explanation.
The tone plus the complex of muscular and tactile stimuli
generated by ﬂexion becomes a compound conditioned stimulus
which elicits salivation. Neither the tone nor the muscular and
tactile stimuli will do so when presented separately, but given the
tone the dog eventually ﬂexes its leg to complete the compound
stimulus. The dog ﬂexes its leg in response to the tone “in order to
form the complete conditioned complex” (pour former ainsi le
complex conditionnel total).
The ultimate ﬂexion in the experiment is no doubt an operant,
but how is it related to the conditioned ﬂexion? Konorski and Miller
suggested a parallel with a rat pressing a lever and being
reinforced with food. But what is at issue is not the nature of the
behavior but the contingencies. If ﬂexion is correlated with a shock,
as in a reﬂex, and if food is mechanically contingent on ﬂexion,
then food is also contingent on the shock. An apparatus will have
the Miller and Konorski effect if it simply administers a shock and
then operates a food dispenser a second or two later,
independently of the behavior. (The tone is unnecessary, so long
as ﬂexion is always followed by presentation of food.)
Contingencies of this sort are rare, if not entirely lacking in the
world at large. Operant behavior is observed only when there are
“responses uncorrelated with observable stimuli.”
Something similar to the Konorski and Miller arrangement
survives (and unnecessarily complicates an experiment) when food
is smeared on a lever to induce a rat to “press” it or when a child’s

hand is moved by the teacher to form a letter properly. Imitative
and instructional stimuli used to evoke operant responses so that
they can be reinforced do not fall in the same class because they
do not elicit behavior. Even so, reinforcement is most effective
when such stimuli are minimal.
My thesis (The Concept of the Reﬂex in the Description of
Behavior [124]) was obviously close to reﬂex physiology,
particularly in the work of Sherrington, Magnus, and Pavlov. The
stimulus was still a prominent variable. Nevertheless, other
variables were assigned a comparable role in the formula
R = f(S, A).
The example under discussion was “reﬂex fatigue,” where the
variable A represented, not a synaptic state as Sherrington
contended, but time or number of elicited responses. Comparable
formulations of conditioning, “emotion,” and “drive” were suggested,
in which a “third” variable—that is, a variable in addition to S and R
—was to be invoked. My reply to Konorski and Miller (128)
identiﬁed the contingency between a response and its
consequence as the important variable in operant conditioning.
At ﬁrst glance, Edward Tolman seems to have moved well
beyond a stimulus-response formula. He made no use of eliciting
stimuli, describing his rats as “docile.” He turned from topography of
response to goal-directedness, and used apparatus which
emphasized purpose (represented spatially—see page 107). But
he put the “third” variables inside the organism, where they
“intervened” between stimulus and response. There was no reason
to do this except to maintain something like the old reﬂex-arc
pattern. His intervening variables quickly assumed the function of
mental processes (as they were essentially designed to do), and it
is not surprising that they have been warmly taken up by cognitive
psychologists.
Clark Hull kept quite explicitly to the stimulus-response formula. In
h i s Principles of Behavior (71) he emphasized topographical
properties of a response as measures of its strength. He not only
appealed to central processes; he made them the main object of
inquiry. Two processes had no other function than to rescue a
stimulus-response formula: “afferent neural interaction” converted
physical stimuli into forms which seemed to be effective and
“behavioral oscillation” accounted for discrepancies between

predicted and observed responses. Other central processes were
said to be the effect of variables other than stimuli and responses.
The neurological character of all these central processes was
increasingly emphasized.

2

Utopia as an experimental culture

Walden Two (133) describes an imaginary community of about a
thousand people who are living a Good Life. They enjoy a
pleasant rural setting and work only a few hours a day, without
being compelled to do so. Their children are cared for and
educated by specialists with due regard for the lives they are going
to lead. Food is good and sanitation and medical care excellent.
There is plenty of leisure and many ways of enjoying it. Art, music,
and literature ﬂourish, and scientiﬁc research is encouraged. Life in
Walden Two is not only good, it seems feasible. It is within the
reach of intelligent men of goodwill who will apply the principles
which are now emerging from the scientiﬁc study of human
behavior to the design of culture. Some readers may take the book
as written with tongue in cheek, but it was actually a quite serious
proposal.
The book was violently attacked as soon as it appeared. Life
magazine (91) called it a “slander on some old notions of the ‘good
life’ … Such a triumph of mortmain, or the ‘dead hand’, [as] has not
been envisaged since the days of Sparta … a slur upon a name, a
corruption of an impulse.” In The Quest for Utopia (104) Negley
and Patrick, while agreeing that sooner or later “the principle of
psychological conditioning would be made the basis of the serious
construction of utopia …,” found they were quite unprepared for
“the shocking horror of the idea when positively presented. Of all
the dictatorships espoused by utopists,” they continued, “this is the
most profound, and incipient dictators might well ﬁnd in this utopia
a guide book of political practice.” And Joseph Wood Krutch soon
devoted a substantial part of The Measure of Man (87) to an attack
on what he called an “ignoble utopia.” The controversy grows more
violent and puzzling as the years pass.
There is clearly a renewal of interest in utopian speculation. A
pattern is probably not set when, as two psychoanalysts have
suggested, “in need of and in despair for the absent breast, the
infant hallucinates the fulﬁllment and thus postpones momentarily
the overwhelming panic of prolonged frustration” (42), but there are
other possibilities. For many people a utopia serves as an
alternative to a kind of political dream which is still suppressed by
vestiges of political witch-hunting. For some it may show

dissatisfaction with our international stance; an experimental
community is a sort of domestic Peace Corps. Whatever the
explanation, there is no doubt that many people are now inclined
to scrutinize the way of life in which they ﬁnd themselves, to
question its justification, and to consider alternatives.
But this is also an anti-utopian age. The modern classics—
Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World (72) and George Orwell’s
Nineteen Eighty Four (108) describe ways of life we must be sure
to avoid. George Kateb has analysed the issue in Utopia and Its
Enemies (77), a title obviously based on Karl Popper’s The Open
Society and Its Enemies (114), which was itself an early skirmish in
the war against utopia. The strange thing in all this is the violence.
One of Plato’s characters calls his Republic “a city of pigs,” but
never before have dreams of a better world raised such a storm.
Possibly one explanation is that now, for the ﬁrst time, the dream
must be taken seriously. Utopias are science ﬁction, and we have
learned that science fiction has a way of coming true.

Utopian techniques
We can take a step toward explaining why Utopia only now seems
within reach by looking at some classical examples. In his Republic
and in parts of other dialogues, Plato portrayed a well-managed
society patterned on the Greek city-state. He suggested features
which would presumably contribute to its success, but he put his
faith in a wise ruler—a philosopher-king who, as philosopher, would
know what to do and, as king, would be able to do it. It is an old
and not very honorable strategy: when you do not know what
should be done, assume that there is someone who does. The
philosopher-king was to patch up a defective governmental design
as the need arose, but it was not clear how he was to do so.
There are those—among them theologians—who argue that the
next great utopian vision was the Christian heaven. St. Augustine
developed the theme in his City of God. It was certainly a good life
based on the highest authority, but important details were missing.
Everyone who went to heaven was to be happy, but it was not
clear just why. No one, in fact, has ever portrayed a very interesting
heaven. St. Augustine’s mundane version set the pattern for the
monastic communities of early Christianity, but it would be hard to
defend it as a good life. The monastery was a transitory state to
which men turned with assurance that it was to be followed by a

better life in a world to come.
Plato hoped to ﬁnd the good life sub homine, and St. Augustine
sought it sub deo. It remained for Thomas More to propose that it
might be found sub lege. More was a lawyer, and history had
begun to show the importance of charters, constitutions, and other
agreements which men might make among themselves in order to
live peacefully together. The title of his book, Utopia, which gave
the name to this kind of speculation, has an ambiguous etymology.
The Greek root of Utopia denotes a place, but the preﬁx means
either good or nonexistent—or possibly, and cynically, both. Within
a century another lawyer, Francis Bacon, had extended More’s
appeal to reason in his fragmentary utopia, The New Atlantis, in
which he also looked to government and law for a solution—
although he suggested that scientists might be called on as
advisers. (The scientiﬁc institution he described—Solomon’s House
—was in fact the model on which the Royal Society was soon
founded.)
But was law and order the answer? Erasmus thought not. He
supported More’s utopian vision, but with reservations. Reason
might contribute to the good life, but it was a mistake to overlook
other things. Erasmus was amused by the fact that More’s name
was the Latin root for “fool,” and he whimsically defended his friend
by writing The Praise of Folly. Government, he said, is all very well,
but were it not for the folly of sex, no one would be born, and were
it not for the folly of appetite, no one would survive, to be
governed.
It was not long before further doubt was cast on the necessity or
sufﬁciency of law and order. Round-the-world voyagers returning
from the South Seas brought back stories of a good life which
ﬂourished without beneﬁt of civilization on the European pattern.
Men were peaceful and happy although completely ignorant of
western morals and with little or no visible government. Diderot
developed the theme in his Supplement to the Voyage of
Bougainville—for example, in the amusing scene in which a
Catholic priest and a Tahitian chief discuss sexual morality. JeanJacques Rousseau took a stronger line: government was not only
unnecessary, it was inimical to the good life. Natural man—the
noble savage—was wise and good; government corrupted him.
Here were the beginnings of a philosophy of anarchy which still
finds a place in utopian speculation.
(The South Seas proved that natural man was not only good but

self-sufﬁcient. Governments made men dependent upon other
men, but the shipwrecked sailor, aided by the abundant resources
of a tropical isle, could be master of all he surveyed. A special kind
of utopian writing began to take shape when Robinson Crusoe put
the solitary good life to the test. Frontier America offered many
opportunities to the individual coureur de bois, and the theme was
still strong in the middle of the nineteenth century when Henry
David Thoreau built his own tropical island on the shores of Walden
Pond.)
Exaggerated reports of life in the South Seas led to a rash of
idyllic utopias, many of them set in the tropics. And now, for the first
time, such a world seemed feasible. It is true that the Greeks
dreamed of Arcadia, which was a real place, and proposals to
found a utopia were occasionally made (according to Gibbon [53]
the Emperor Gallienus was on the point of offering the philosopher
Plotinus a captured city so that he might try Plato’s experiment
when, perhaps fortunately for Plotinus, he was called away on
emergencies of state), but More and Bacon were not drawing
blueprints; they were simply describing societies with which
contemporary life might be compared. The South Seas were real,
and life on that pattern could therefore be taken seriously. Etienne
Cabet’s Voyage en Icarie (34) was one of the most popular of the
idyllic utopias, and Cabet actually came to America in the 1850’s
planning to set up Icaria on the Red River in Texas. He died in St.
Louis, Missouri, but a community on the Icarian principle survived
for some time in the Middle West.
It was the idyllic utopia which Karl Marx attacked. To portray a
good life was one thing, to bring it about quite another. In this
sense Marx was anti-utopian, but he had his own vision, and it was
not entirely unrelated to the South Sea idyll. It was possible that
human happiness might be traced not so much to the absence of
government as to an abundance of goods. Nature could not
always be counted on to supply what man needed to be happy in
the style of the South Seas, but man would provide for himself if he
were able. A Utopia hinged on economic principles.
The notion had been developing for a long time. Goods were
essential to the good life, but where were they to be found? Bacon
had argued that science was power, and the technology which he
advocated and which began to emerge in the seventeenth century
seemed a possible answer. If men were not producing the wealth

they needed to be happy, it was because they did not know how.
Science must come to the rescue. The great encyclopedia of
Diderot and D’Alembert was to have this effect. Many recipes,
formulae, and systems for the production of wealth which had been
trade, guild, or family secrets had only to be made public and men
would go busily to work.
Marx thought he saw another reason why men were not
producing the wealth they needed for happiness: the means of
production were being sequestered by selﬁsh people. The good
life would follow when the necessary tools were made available to
everyone. This was the solution emphasized in nineteenth-century
utopias, exempliﬁed in England by William Morris’s News From
Nowhere (102) and in the United States by Edward Bellamy’s
Looking Backward (13). The doctrine that the good life will follow
when each has been supplied “according to his need” is scriptural:
it is St. Augustine, not St. Karl. It has remained, of course, a strong
utopian theme: technology is to solve our problems by making
everyone afﬂuent. A few years ago Mr. Khrushchev announced
that before long all food, clothing, and housing in Russia would be
free. The good life was just round the corner.
An irritating problem survived. Given both the skills and the
means, men may still not produce wealth. Nineteenth-century
theorists found it necessary to appeal to a natural compulsion to
work. William Morris describes a man looking for work, not to earn
money but simply to express a need. A Russian economist when
asked why men will work when all food, clothing, and housing are
free, replied with a conﬁdent smile, “For the common good,” but
that is by no means certain. “To each according to his need” must
be balanced by “from each according to his ability,” and that is an
assignment which has so far proved to be beyond the reach of
economics. And there are other kinds of goods which physical
technology has not yet been able to supply. A more
comprehensive behavioral science is needed.

Behavioral Utopias
Rousseau knew that natural man would not solve all his problems,
and Marx knew that economic principles would not sufﬁce, and
both took other characteristics of human behavior into account. A
thoroughgoing behavioral utopia, however, was to wait for the
twentieth century. The two leading ﬁgures of behavioral science in

that century are Freud and Pavlov. Curiously enough, no utopian
novel seems to have been written on Freudian principles. Pavlov
was drawn into utopian speculation by accident. In 1917 the
Russians needed the principle of the conditioned reﬂex to support
their ideology, and they made Pavlov a national hero. If men were
neither productive nor happy, it was the fault of their environments,
and with the help of Pavlovian principles the Russian government
would change the world and thus change men. But by the early
nineteen-thirties the position had become embarrassing, as Bauer
(11) has noted. The government had had its chance, and Russians
were not yet conspicuously productive or happy. Pavlov went out
of favor, and for twenty years Russian research on conditioned
reflexes was confined to physiological processes not closely related
to behavior. When the Second World War restored Russia’s
conﬁdence, Pavlov returned as an intellectual hero, and the
conditioned reflex was given another chance to build the good life.
Meanwhile, Aldous Huxley had explored the Utopian implications
of Pavlov’s work in Brave New World. The book is, of course, a
satire, heralding the threat rather than the promise of the
conditioned reﬂex. There is nothing really new about conditioning,
and Huxley seems to have known it. When Miranda in The
Tempest exclaims, “Oh, brave new world that has such creatures in
it,” she is talking about creatures washed up on the shores of her
utopian island who have come from the contemporary world.1 For
Huxley the conditioned reﬂex was a means of determining what the
citizens of his brave new world would call good. It was important,
for example, that certain kinds of workers should not be distracted
by literature or nature, and babies who were destined to be
workers of that sort were therefore appropriately conditioned. They
were put on the ﬂoor of a laboratory near a few attractive books
and bouquets. As they moved toward them and touched them,
they were electrically shocked or frightened by loud noises. When
they tried again, the treatment was repeated. Soon they were safe:
they would never again take an interest in literature or nature.
Pavlov had something to say about changing what is good about
the good life because he had studied responses which have to do
with what one feels. The good life which Huxley portrayed (with
contempt, of course) felt good. It is no accident that it included an
art form called the “feelies” and drugs which produced or changed
feelings.

The good things in life have other effects, however. One is the
satisfaction of needs in the simple sense of the relief of distress.
We sometimes eat to escape from the pangs of hunger and take
pills to allay pain, and out of compassion we feed the hungry and
heal the sick. For such purposes we design a culture which
provides for each “according to his need.” But satisfaction is a
limited objective; we are not necessarily happy because we have
everything we want. The word sated is related to the word sad.
Simple abundance, whether in an afﬂuent society, a benevolent
climate, or a welfare state, is not enough. When people are
supplied according to their needs, regardless of what they are
doing, they remain inactive. The abundant life is a candy-mountain
land or Cockaigne. It is the Schlaraffenland—the idler’s land—of
Hans Sachs, and idleness is the goal only of those who have been
compulsively or anxiously busy.
Heavens are usually described by listing the good things to be
found in them, but no one has ever designed a really interesting
heaven on that principle. The important thing about the good
things in life is what people are doing when they get them. “Goods”
are reinforcers, and a way of life is a set of contingencies of
reinforcement. In utopian literature, the arrangements of
contingencies have seldom been explicit. As we have seen,
contingencies of reinforcement are not the most conspicuous
aspects of life, and the experimental analysis which has revealed
their nature and their effects is of recent origin. There is probably a
better reason, however, why they have been overlooked. The very
reinforcers which ﬁgure in utopian writing exert too powerful an
effect upon the writer. If we ask someone to describe the kind of
world in which he would like to live, he will probably begin to list the
reinforcers he would want to ﬁnd in it. He will go straight to the
things which make life good, and probably simply because he will
be reinforced for doing so. Food, sex, security, the approval of
one’s fellow men, works of art, music, and literature—these are the
things men want and act to get and therefore the things they
mention when they are asked to describe a world in which they
would like to live. The signiﬁcant fact is that they seldom mention
what they are to do to get them. They specify a better world simply
as they wish for it, dream of it, or pray for it, giving no thought to
the manner of their getting it.
A much more interesting possibility arises when we recognize the

role of contingencies of reinforcement, for we can then apply
something like the “behavioral engineering” of Walden Two to
cultural design. A utopian community is a pilot experiment, like the
pilot plant in industry or the pilot experiment in science, where
principles are tested on a small scale to avoid the risks and
inconvenience of size. Utopias have usually been isolated
geographically because border problems can then be neglected,
and they have usually implied a break with tradition (symbolized in
religious communities, for example, by a ritual of rebirth) because
problems raised by conﬂicting cultures are then minimized. A new
practice can be put into effect more easily in a small community
than in the world at large, and the results more easily seen. Given
these helpful simpliﬁcations and the demonstrated power of a
behavioral technology, a successful utopia is not too hard to
imagine. The necessary physical environment is being analyzed in
the ﬁeld of urban design. The micro-rayons in Russia, the
Newtownes of Great Britain, and many urban experiments in the
United States, while still largely concerned with physical aspects,
have also been designed with some attention to the basic principle
that a city or a building is meaningful only as an environment in
which people live and must rest upon an understanding of the
interaction between behavior and the environment. It is true that
the special communities represented by hospitals for psychotics,
homes for retardates, training schools for delinquents, camps, and
standard classrooms are not typical communities because the
population at large is not properly represented, but the problems
which arise in designing communities of that sort are not far from
those in communities in the utopian sense. As solutions to those
problems grow more successful, the plausibility of a utopian design
increases. To most people “utopian” still means “impossible,” but
that usage may have to be changed.

Liking a way of life
A common objection to Walden Two (and no doubt to other
utopias) goes like this: “I shouldn’t like to live there. I don’t mind
doing the things the author is at pains to save me from doing, I
don’t like to do some of the things I should be expected to do, and
I like to do things I could not do. Granted that life there meets
many traditional speciﬁcations of the Good Life and compares
favorably with existing cultures, it is still a world designed to please

the author, and he is bound by his own culture, not mine. He would
like to live there, of course, but he must not expect me to join him.”
We “like” a way of life to the extent that we are reinforced by it.
We like a world in which both natural and social reinforcers are
abundant and easily achieved and in which aversive stimuli are
either rare or easily avoided. Unfortunately, however, it is a fact
about man’s genetic endowment and the world in which he lives
that immediate rewards are often offset by deferred punishments,
and that punishments must often be taken for the sake of deferred
rewards. To maximize net gains we must do things we do not like to
do and forgo things we like. A culture cannot change these facts,
but it can induce us to deal with them effectively. Indeed, this is its
most important function.
It is not too often successful. A common practice, for example, is
to extract rules from the prevailing contingencies, natural or social,
and to make positive and negative reinforcers contingent upon the
behavior of following them (see Chapter 6). The rule-following
contingencies are often un-skillfully designed, and members of a
culture seldom take net consequences into account. On the
contrary, they resist control of this sort. They object to what they
are asked to do and either drop out of the culture—as hermits,
hobos, or hippies—or remain in it while challenging its principles.
Contingencies of reinforcement which maximize net gains need
to be much more effective. Conditioned reinforcers can be used to
bridge the gap between behavior and its remoter consequences,
and supplementary reinforcers can be arranged to serve until
remote reinforcers can be brought into play. An important point is
that effective contingencies need to be programmed—that is, they
are effective only when a person has passed through a series of
intermediate contingencies. Those who have reached the terminal
contingencies will be productive, creative, and happy—in a word,
maximally effective. The outsider confronted with the terminal
contingencies for the ﬁrst time may not like them or be able to
imagine liking them.
The designer must take something else into account which is still
more difﬁcult to bring to bear on the individual member. Will the
culture work? It is a question which is clariﬁed by the concept of a
community as an experiment. A community is a thing, having a life
of its own. It will survive or perish, and the designer must keep that
fact in mind. The problem is that survival is often furthered by
behavior which is not only not reinforced but may have punishing

(even lethal) consequences. Phylogenic contingencies of survival
(see Chapter 6) supply examples. When a member of a herd of
grazing animals spots the approach of a predator and utters a
warning cry, the group is more likely to escape and survive, but the
member who emits the cry calls attention to himself and may perish.
Ontogenic contingencies of reinforcement work in the same way: a
culture induces a hero to die for his country or a martyr for his
religion.
Contingencies which promote survival are also usually badly
designed. Something seems to be gained if the culture can be
identiﬁed with a race, nation, or religious group, but this leads to
jingoistic excesses. Contrived sanctions, positive and negative, are
often spurious. The result is a different kind of dropout, who
objects to taking the survival of a culture as a “value.” The protest
sometimes takes this form: “Why should I care whether my way of
life survives or contributes to the way of life of the future?” An
honest answer would seem to be, “There is no good reason, but if
your culture has not convinced you that there is, so much the
worse for your culture.” The thoughtful person may inquire further.
Why should the culture care whether it survives? Survival for what?
How do we know that a culture is evolving in the right direction?
Questions of this sort show a misunderstanding of the nature of
evolution, biological and cultural. The processes of mutation and
selection do not require, and may not provide, any advance plan of
the state toward which they lead.
A well-designed culture is a set of contingencies of reinforcement
under which members behave in ways which maintain the culture,
enable it to meet emergencies, and change it in such a way that it
will do these things even more effectively in the future. Personal
sacriﬁce may be a dramatic example of the conﬂict of interests
between the group and its members, but it is the product of a bad
design. Under better contingencies behavior which strengthens the
culture may be highly reinforcing. A jingoistic nationalism may be an
easy way of underlining the good of a group, but the survival of a
culture regarded simply as a set of practices, quite apart from those
who practice them, can also be made the basis for a design. (It is
signiﬁcant that current discussions of survival are likely to speak of
competition between ways of life rather than between nations or
religions.) Here again effective contingencies must be programmed,
and the terminal contingencies will not necessarily be “liked” by

those who confront them for the first time.
The problem, in short, is not to design a way of life which will be
liked by men as they now are, but a way of life which will be liked
by those who live it. Whether those who are not part of a culture
like it may have a bearing on whether they join and therefore on
the promotion of a new culture and possibly on the design of early
features intended to attract outsiders or prevent the defection of
new members. It has no bearing on the ultimate goodness of the
design. It is nevertheless in its effects on human nature—on the
genetic endowment of the species—that any environment, physical
or social, is to be evaluated.
The man who insists upon judging a culture in terms of whether
or not he likes it is the true immoralist. Just as he refuses to follow
rules designed to maximize his own net gain because they conﬂict
with immediate gratiﬁcation, so he rejects contingencies designed
to strengthen the group because they conﬂict with his “rights as an
individual.” He sets himself up as a standard of human nature,
implying or insisting that the culture which produced him is the only
good or natural culture. He wants the world he wants and is
unwilling to ask why he wants it. He is so completely the product of
his own culture that he fears the inﬂuence of any other. He is like
the child who said: “I’m glad I don’t like broccoli because if I liked it,
I’d eat a lot of it, and I hate it.”

Objections to a designed culture
Many of those who like a given way of life may still object to it if it
has been deliberately designed. Suppose one of the critics of
Walden Two were to happen upon a small isolated community
where—to repeat the ﬁrst paragraph of this chapter—people were
working only a few hours a day and without compulsion, children
were being cared for and educated by specialists with due regard
for the lives they were going to lead, food was good and sanitation
and medical care excellent, and art, music, literature, and science
ﬂourished. Would he not exclaim, “Here is the good life!” But then
let him discover that the community was explicitly designed, and
the spectre of the designer would spoil it all. Why?
Design implies control, and there are many reasons why we fear
it. The very techniques are often objectionable, for control passes
ﬁrst to those who have the power to treat others aversively. The
state is still identiﬁed with the power to punish, some religious

agencies still claim to mediate supernatural punishments, and
schoolboys are still caned. This is “control through fear,” and we
naturally fear it. There is historical evidence that men have slowly
turned to nonaversive methods. They have thereby escaped from
some aversive stimuli, but they have not necessarily made other
kinds of control acceptable. Even when a wealthy government can
reinforce the behavior it wants instead of punishing the behavior it
does not want—the result may still be exploitation.
The archetype of a nonexploiting controller is the benevolent
dictator. We suspect him because we cannot imagine why he
should control benevolently. Yet in some of the special
communities we have noted the contingencies which control the
designer do not conﬂict with those he uses in his design. When
contingencies are well arranged in a hospital for psychotics, for
example, the fact that patients make fewer demands on the staff
and yet display as much dignity and happiness as their pathology
permits is enough to explain the behavior of the designer. In a
home for retarded children, if aversive control is minimal and
happiness and dignity therefore maximal, and if some of the
children learn enough to be able to move into the world at large,
these effects will be among the important reinforcers of those who
have designed the community. If juvenile delinquents behave well
in a training school and at the same time acquire skills which permit
them to lead nondelinquent lives after they leave it, the design can
be explained. In each of these communities a way of life is
designed both for the good of those who live it and for the good of
the designer, and the two goods do not conﬂict. Nevertheless,
technologies of this sort are often opposed just because control is
exerted.
Democracy is an effort to solve the problem by letting the people
design the contingencies under which they are to live or—to put it
another way—by insisting that the designer himself live under the
contingencies he designs. It is reasonable to suppose that he will
not use aversive techniques if he himself will be affected by them
or positive techniques which lead to exploitation if he himself will be
exploited. But specialization is almost inevitable (minorities readily
understand how difﬁcult it is to keep the controller and the
controllee in the same skin), and specialization implies special
contingencies which are still open to suspicion.
One safeguard against exploitation is to make sure that the
designer never controls; he refuses to put his design into effect

himself or is forbidden to do so or—better still—dies. In Walden
Two the protagonist, Frazier, has simply abdicated. (As an
additional assurance that he exerts no current control, he was
given what might be called negative charisma.) But he may still be
feared because a particularly subtle kind of exploitation survives.
No matter how benevolent he may be, or how far from the exercise
of power, the designer gets credit for the achievements of the
community, and the credit is taken from those who live in it. A ruler
who discovers a better way of inducing people to behave well gets
credit for an orderly society but at the expense of those who live in
it, who would be more admired if they behaved well in a disorderly
society. A man who designs a better way of teaching gets credit for
the beneﬁts of improved education but at the expense of the
students, who would be more admired if they learned when badly
taught or not taught at all. The industrialist who designs a better
way of producing goods gets credit for increased production but at
the expense of the workers, who would get more credit for being
efﬁcient and enterprising under another system. A utopia as a
completely managed culture seems to work a wholesale
despoliation of this sort. Its citizens are automatically good, wise,
and productive, and we have no reason to admire them or give
them credit. Some critics have gone so far as to say that they have
been robbed of their very humanity. Mr. Krutch has said that
Walden Two dehumanizes man, and C. S. Lewis entitled a book on
this theme The Abolition of Man (90).
We admire people and give them credit for what they do in order
to induce them to behave in admirable ways (149). We are
particularly likely to do so when no other kind of control is available,
as I have shown elsewhere. When alternative practices are
invented, or when the world changes so that the behavior at issue
is no longer necessary, the practice of admiration is dropped. (It is
a temporary measure, the weakness of which is suggested by the
fact that we do not admire those who are obviously behaving well
simply because they have been admired for doing so.) Admiration
often supplements aversive control (we admire those who meet
their responsibilities and hence need not be punished), and it may
indeed represent an early form of an alternative practice, but it
must eventually yield to other alternatives. As we come to
understand human behavior and its role in the evolution of
cultures, and particularly the contingencies which induce men to

design cultures, we must dispense with the practice of giving
personal credit. But that step is disturbing for other reasons.

Man and his destiny
The notion of personal credit is incompatible with the hypothesis
that human behavior is wholly determined by genetic and
environmental forces. The hypothesis is sometimes said to imply
that man is a helpless victim, but we must not overlook the extent
to which he controls the things which control him. Man is largely
responsible for the environment in which he lives. He has changed
the physical world to minimize aversive properties and maximize
positive reinforcements, and he has constructed governmental,
religious, educational, economic, and psychotherapeutic systems
which promote satisfying personal contacts and make him more
skillful, informed, productive, and happy. He is engaged in a
gigantic exercise in self-control, as the result of which he has come
to realize more and more of his genetic potential.
He has reached a very special point in that story. He is the
product of an evolutionary process in which essentially accidental
changes in genetic endowment have been differentially selected
by accidental features of the environment, but he has now reached
the point at which he can examine that process and do something
about it. He can change the course of his own evolution through
selective breeding, and in the not too distant future he will quite
possibly change it by changing his chromosomes. The “value
judgments” which will then be demanded are beginning to attract
attention. The point is that we have long since reached a
comparable stage in the evolution of cultures. We produce cultural
“mutations” when we invent new social practices, and we change
the conditions under which they are selected when we change the
environments in which men live.
To refuse to do either of these things is to leave further changes
in our culture to accident, and accident is the tyrant really to be
feared. Adventitious arrangements of both genetic and
environmental variables have brought man to his present position
and are responsible for its faults as well as its virtues. The very
misuse of personal control to which we object so violently is the
product of accidents which have made the weak subject to the
strong, the dull to the sharp, the well-intentioned to the selﬁsh. We
can do better than that. By accepting the fact that human behavior

is controlled—by things if not by men—we take a big step forward,
for we can then stop trying to avoid control and begin to look for
the most effective kinds.
Whether we like it or not, survival is the value by which we shall
be judged. The culture which takes its survival into account is most
likely to survive. To recognize the fact is not, unfortunately, to
resolve all our difﬁculties. It is hard to say what kinds of human
behavior will prove most valuable in a future which cannot be
clearly foreseen. Nor is it easy to identify the practices which will
generate the kinds of behavior needed, but here at least we have
made some progress. The design of behavior to speciﬁcation is the
very essence of a technology derived from an experimental
analysis.
The authors of the classical utopian literature proposed to
achieve the good life they described in ways which are now seen
to be inadequate, but the value of utopian thinking must not,
therefore, be underestimated. In a curious way it has always taken
cultural evolution into account. It has scrutinized the sources of
social practices, examined their consequences, and proposed
alternatives which should have more desirable consequences—
and all in the experimental spirit characteristic of science.
In the long run, of course, we must dispense with utopian
simpliﬁcations, for the real test of a culture is the world at large.
(The anti-utopians, of course, are talking about that world too; they
would scarcely be so violent about a community of a few hundred
people.) And the persistent question about that test is this: Is it to
be our culture which survives and contributes most to the culture of
the future? We can point to certain reassuring features. We enjoy
the advantages which ﬂow from the very practice of changing
practice; until recently we have been perhaps unique in our
disposition to try new ways of doing things. We give thought to
consequences. Our practice of asking whether something works or
whether something else would work better is often criticized as a
crude pragmatism, but it may prove to have been an important
cultural mutation. We readily change practices because we are not
greatly restrained by revelation or immutable decrees, and for
similar reasons we are free to pursue a science of behavior. Above
all, we have recognized the need for the explicit design of a way of
life.
But not all signs are propitious. The contingencies of
reinforcement which shape and maintain the behavior of the

cultural designer are not yet very clear. Obvious economic
contingencies bring yearly improvements in automobiles, for
example, but there are no comparable forces at work to improve
governmental and ethical practices, education, housing, or
psychotherapy. The survival of the culture has not yet been
brought to bear in a very effective way on those who are engaged
in government in the broadest sense.
Another danger signal is anti-utopianism itself (the clariﬁcation of
which may be one of the most important contributions of utopian
thinking). Anti-utopian arguments are the utopian arguments of an
earlier era; that is why we call them reactionary. At one stage in the
evolution of a culture, for example, aversive control may be
effectively centralized in a despotic government. The appropriate
philosophy or literature which supports it may outlive its usefulness
without losing its power and will continue to support those who
oppose any change—say, to democratic practices. Something of
the same sort is now happening with respect to the doctrine of
individual freedom. In undermining despotic control it is important to
convince the individual that he is the source of the power to
govern, that he can free himself of restraining forces, that he can
make unique contributions, and so on. This is done by calling him
free and responsible, admiring him for meeting his responsibilities,
and punishing him for failing to do so. The supporting philosophy
and literature have remained effective and are responsible for
much of current anti-utopianism.
A scientiﬁc analysis of human behavior and of genetic and
cultural evolution cannot make individual freedom the goal of
cultural design. The individual is not an origin or source. He does
not initiate anything. Nor is it he who survives. (The doctrine of
survival after death is a source of personal reinforcers appropriate
only to an earlier design.) What survives are the species and the
culture. They lie “beyond the individual” in the sense that they are
responsible for him and outlive him. Nevertheless, a species has no
existence apart from its members or a culture apart from the people
who practice it. It is only through effects on individuals that
practices are selected or designed. If by “man” we mean a member
of the human species with its unique genetic endowment, its
human nature, then man is still the measure of all things. But it is a
measure we can use effectively only if we accept it for what it is, as
this is revealed in a scientiﬁc analysis rather than in some earlier

conception, no matter how convincing that conception may have
seemed or how effective it may have proved to be in another
culture.2
It has been argued that it was the well-governed city-state which
suggested to the Greeks that the universe itself might show law
and order and that in their search for the laws which governed it
they laid the foundations of modern science. The problems of
government have grown more difficult, and no modern state is likely
to be taken as the model of a lawful system. It is possible that
science may now repay its debt and restore order to human affairs.

3

The environmental solution

The world in which man lives has been changing much faster than
man himself. In a few hundred generations, highly beneﬁcial
characteristics of the human body have become troublesome. One
of these is the extent to which human behavior is strengthened by
certain kinds of reinforcing consequences.
It was once important, for example, that men should learn to
identify nutritious food and remember where they found it, that they
should learn and remember how to catch ﬁsh and kill game and
cultivate plants, and that they should eat as much as possible
whenever food was available. Those who were most powerfully
reinforced by certain kinds of oral stimulation were most likely to do
all this and to survive—hence man’s extraordinary susceptibility to
reinforcement by sugar and other foodstuffs, a sensitivity which,
under modern conditions of agriculture and food storage, leads to
dangerous overeating.
A similar process of selection presumably explains the reinforcing
power of sexual contact. At a time when the human race was
periodically decimated by pestilence, famine, and war and steadily
attenuated by endemic ills and an unsanitary and dangerous
environment, it was important that procreative behavior should be
maximized. Those for whom sexual reinforcement was most
powerful should have most quickly achieved copulation and should
have continued to copulate most frequently. The breeders selected
by sexual competition must have been not only the most powerful
and skillful members of the species but those for whom sexual
contact was most reinforcing. In a safer environment the same
susceptibility leads to serious overpopulation with its attendant ills.
The principle also holds for aggressive behavior. At a time when
men were often plundered and killed, by animals and other men, it
was important that any behavior which harmed or frightened
predators should be quickly learned and long sustained. Those
who were most strongly reinforced by evidences of damage to
others should have been most likely to survive. Now, under better
forms of government, supported by ethical and moral practices
which protect person and property, the reinforcing power of
successful aggression leads to personal illness, neurotic and
otherwise, and to war—if not total destruction.

Such discrepancies between man’s sensitivity to reinforcement
and the contribution which the reinforced behaviors make to his
current welfare raise an important problem in the design of a
culture. How are we to keep from overeating, from overpopulating
the world, and from destroying each other? How can we make sure
that these properties of the human organism, once necessary for
survival, shall not now prove lethal?

Three traditional solutions
One solution to the problem might be called the voluptuary or
sybaritic. Reinforcement is maximized while the unfortunate
consequences are either disregarded—on the principle of eat,
drink, and be merry for tomorrow we die—or prevented. Romans
avoided some of the consequences of overeating, as an
occasional neurotic may do today, by using the vomitorium. A
modern solution is nonnutritious food. Artiﬁcial sweeteners have an
effect on the tongue similar to that of ripe fruit, and we can now be
reinforced for eating things which have fewer harmful effects. The
sybaritic solution to the problem of sexual reinforcement is either
irresponsible intercourse or the prevention of consequences
through contraception or nonprocreative forms of sex. Aggressive
behavior is enjoyed without respect to the consequences in the
donnybrook. Some consequences are avoided by being
aggressive towards animals, as in bearbaiting and other blood
sports, or vicariously aggressive toward both men and animals, as
in the Roman circus or in modern body sports and games.
(Broadcasters of professional football and prize ﬁghts have used
special microphones to pick up the thud of body against body.)
It is not difﬁcult to promote the sybaritic solution. Men readily
subscribe to a way of life in which primary reinforcers are abundant,
for the simple reason that subscribing is a form of behavior
susceptible to reinforcement. In such a world one may most
effectively pursue happiness (or, to use a less frivolous expression,
fulﬁll one’s nature), and the pursuit is easily rationalized: “Nothing
but the best, the richest and fullest experience possible, is good
enough for man.” In these forms, however, the pursuit of
happiness is either dangerously irresponsible or deliberately
nonproductive and wasteful. Satiation may release a man for
productive behavior, but in a relatively unproductive condition.
A second solution might be called, with strict attention to

etymology, the puritanical. Reinforcement is offset by punishment.
Gluttony, lust, and violence are classiﬁed as bad or wrong (and
punished by the ethical group), as illegal (and punished by the
government), as sinful (and punished by religious authorities), or as
maladjusted (and punished by those therapists who use
punishment). The puritanical solution is never easy to “sell,” and it
is not always successful. Punishment does not merely cancel
reinforcement; it leads to a struggle for self-control which is often
violent and time consuming. Whether one is wrestling with the devil
or a cruel superego, there are neurotic by-products. It is possible
that punishment sometimes successfully “represses” behavior and
the human energies can then be redirected into science, art, and
literature, but the metaphor of redirection of energy raises a
question to which we must return. In any event the puritanical
solution has many unwanted by-products, and we may well explore
other ways of generating the acceptable behaviors attributed to it.
A third solution is to bring the body up to date. Reinforcing
effects could conceivably be made commensurate with current
requirements for survival. Genetic changes could be accelerated
through selective breeding or possibly through direct action on the
germ plasm, but certain chemical or surgical measures are at the
moment more feasible. The appetite-suppressing drugs now
available often have undesirable side effects, but a drug which
would make food less reinforcing and therefore weaken foodreinforced behavior would be widely used. The possibility is not
being overlooked by drug manufacturers. Drugs to reduce the
effects of sexual reinforcement—such as those said to be used,
whether effectively or not, by penal institutions and the armed
services—may not be in great demand, but they would have their
uses and might prove surprisingly popular. The semistarvation
recommended in some religious regimens as a means of
weakening sexual behavior presumably acts through chemical
changes. The chemical control of aggressive behavior—by
tranquilizers—is already well advanced.
A physiological reduction in sensitivity to reinforcement is not
likely to be acceptable to the sybarite. Curiously enough, the
puritan would also ﬁnd it objectionable because certain admirable
forms of self-control would not be exhibited. Paraphrasing La
Rochefoucauld, we might say that we should not give a man credit
for being tranquil if his aggressive inclinations have been
suppressed by a tranquilizer. A practical difﬁculty at the moment is

that measures of this sort are not speciﬁc and probably undercut
desirable reinforcing effects.

A fourth solution
A more direct solution is suggested by the experimental analysis of
behavior. One may deal with problems generated by a powerful
reinforcer simply by changing the contingencies of reinforcement.
An environment may be designed in which reinforcers which
ordinarily generate unwanted behavior simply do not do so. The
solution seems reasonable enough when the reinforcers are of no
special signiﬁcance. A student once defended the use of
punishment with the following story. A young mother had come to
call on his family, bringing her ﬁve-year-old son. The boy
immediately climbed onto the piano bench and began to pound
the keys. Conversation was almost impossible and the visit a
failure. The student argued for the puritanical solution: he would
have punished the child—rather violently, he implied. He was
overlooking the nature of pianos. For more than two hundred years
talented and skillful men have worked to create a device which will
powerfully reinforce the behavior of pressing keys. (The piano, is,
indeed, an “eighty-eight lever box.” It exists solely to reinforce the
pressing of levers—or the encouraging of others to press them.)
The child’s behavior simply testiﬁed to the success of the piano
industry. It is bad design to bring child and piano together and
then punish the behavior which naturally follows.
A comparable solution is not so obvious when the reinforcers
have strong biological signiﬁcance because the problem is
misunderstood. We do not say that a child possesses a basic need
to play the piano. It is obvious that the behavior has arisen from a
history of reinforcement. In the case of food, sex, and violence,
however, traditional formulations have emphasized supposed
internal needs or drives. A man who cannot keep from overeating
suffers from strong internal stimulation which he easily mistakes for
the cause (rather than a collateral effect of the cause) of his
behavior, and which he tries to reduce in order to solve his
problem. He cannot go directly to the inner stimulation, but only to
some of the conditions responsible for it—conditions which, as he
puts it, “make him feel hungry.” These happen also to be
conditions which “make him eat.” The easiest way to reduce both
the internal stimulation and the strength of the behavior is simply to

eat, but that does not solve the problem. In concentrating on other
ways of changing needs or drives, we overlook a solution to the
behavioral problem.
What a man must control to avoid the troublesome
consequences of oral reinforcement is the behavior reinforced. He
must stop buying and eating candy bars, ordering and eating extra
pieces of cake, eating at odd times of the day, and so on. It is not
some inner state called hunger but overeating which presents a
problem. The behavior can be weakened by making sure that it is
not reinforced. In an environment in which only simple foods have
been available a man eats sensibly—not because he must, but
because no other behavior has ever been strengthened. The
normal environment is of a very different sort. In an afﬂuent society
most people are prodigiously reinforced with food. Susceptibility to
reinforcement leads men to specialize in raising particularly
delicious foods and to process and cook them in ways which make
them as reinforcing as possible. Overanxious parents offer
especially delicious food to encourage children to eat. Powerful
reinforcers (called “candy”) are used to obtain favors, to allay
emotional disturbances, and to strengthen personal relations. It is
as if the environment had been designed to build the very
behaviors which later prove troublesome. The child it produces has
no greater “need for food” than one for whom food has never been
particularly reinforcing.
Similarly, it is not some “sexuality” or “sex drive” which has
troublesome consequences but sexual behavior itself, much of
which can be traced to contingencies of reinforcement. The
conditions under which a young person is ﬁrst sexually reinforced
determine the extent as well as the form of later sexual activity. Nor
is the problem of aggression raised by a “death instinct” or “a
fundamental drive in human beings to hurt one another” but rather
by an environment in which human beings are reinforced when
they hurt one another. To say that there is “something suicidal in
man that makes him enjoy war” is to reverse the causal order;
man’s capacity to enjoy war leads to a form of suicide. In a world in
which a child seldom if ever successfully attacks others, aggressive
behavior is not strong. But the world is usually quite different.
Either through simple neglect or in the belief that innate needs
must be expressed, children are allowed and even encouraged to
attack each other in various ways. Aggressive behavior is
condoned in activities proposed as “a moral equivalent of war.” It

may be that wars have been won on the playing ﬁelds of Eton, but
they have also been started there, for a playing ﬁeld is an arena
for the reinforcement of aggressive action, and the behaviors there
reinforced will sooner or later cause trouble.
The distinction between need and reinforcement is clariﬁed by a
current problem. Many of those who are trying to stop smoking
cigarettes will testify to a basic drive or need as powerful as those
of hunger, sex, and aggression. (For those who have a genuine
drug addiction, smoking is reinforced in part by the alleviation of
withdrawal symptoms, but most smokers can shift to nicotine-free
cigarettes without too much trouble. They are still unable to control
the powerful repertoire of responses which compose smoking.) It is
clear that the troublesome pattern of behavior—“the cigarette
habit”— can be traced, not to a need, but to a history of
reinforcement because there was no problem before the discovery
of tobacco or before the invention of the cigarette as an especially
reinforcing form in which tobacco may be smoked. Whatever their
other needs may have been, our ancestors had no need to smoke
cigarettes, and no one has the need today if, like them, he has
never been reinforced for smoking.
The problem of cigarette smoking has been approached in the
other ways we have examined. Some advertising appeals to the
irresponsible sybarite: buy the cigarette that tastes good and
inhale like a man. Other sybaritic smokers try to avoid the
consequences; the ﬁlter is the contraceptive of the tobacco
industry. The puritanical solution has also been tried. Cigarettes
may be treated so that the smoker is automatically punished by
nausea. Natural aversive consequences—a rough throat, a hoarse
voice, a cigarette cough, or serious illness—may be made more
punishing. The American Cancer Society has tried to condition
aversive consequences with a ﬁlm, in color, showing the removal of
a cancerous lung. As is often the case with the puritanical solution,
aversive stimuli are indeed conditioned—they are felt as “guilt”—but
smoking is not greatly reduced. A true nicotine addiction might be
controlled by taking nicotine or a similar drug in other ways, but a
drug which would be closer to the chemical solution promised by
anti-appetite, anti-sex, and anti-aggression drugs would speciﬁcally
reduce the effect of other reinforcers in smoking. All these
measures are much more difficult than controlling the contingencies
of reinforcement.

(That there is no need to smoke cigarettes may be denied by
those who argue that it is actually composed of several other kinds
of needs, all of them present in nonsmokers. But this is simply to
say that cigarette smoking is reinforced by several distinguishable
effects—by odor, taste, oral stimulation, vasoconstriction in the
lungs, “something to do with the hands,” appearing to resemble
admired ﬁgures, and so on. A nonsmoker has not come under the
control of a particular combination of these reinforcers. If any one
should cause trouble on its own or in some other combination, it
could be analyzed in the same way.)

Making contingencies less effective
The problems raised by man’s extraordinary sensitivity to
reinforcement by food, sexual contact, and aggressive damage
cannot be solved, as the example of cigarette smoking might
suggest, simply by removing these things from the environment. It
would be impossible to change the world that much, and in any
case the reinforcers serve useful functions. (One important function
is simply to encourage support for a culture. A way of life in which
food, sex, and aggression were kept to a bare minimum would not
strongly reinforce those who adopted it nor discourage defections
from it.) The problem is not to eliminate reinforcers but to moderate
their effects. Several possible methods are suggested by recent
work in the experimental analysis of behavior. The mere frequency
with which a reinforcer occurs is much less important than the
contingencies of which it is a part.
We can minimize some unwanted consequences by preventing
the discovery of reinforcing effects. The ﬁrst step in “hooking” a
potential heroin addict is to give him heroin. The reinforcer is not at
ﬁrst contingent on any particular form of behavior; but when its
effect has been felt (and, particularly, when withdrawal symptoms
have developed), it can be made contingent on paying for the
drug. Addiction is prevented simply by making sure that the effect
is never felt. The reinforcing effects of alcohol, caffeine, and
nicotine must be discovered in a similar way, and methods of
preventing addiction take the same form. The process underlies
the practice of giving free samples in food markets; customers are
induced to eat small quantities of a new food so that larger
quantities may be made contingent on surrendering money. Similar
practices are to be found in sexual seduction and in teaching the

pleasures of violence.
Reinforcers are made effective in other ways. Stimuli are
conditioned so that they become reinforcing; aversive properties
are weakened through adaptation so that reinforcing properties
emerge with greater power (a “taste” is thus acquired); and so on.
Processes of this sort have played their part in man’s slow
discovery of reinforcing things. It has been, perhaps, a history of
the discovery of human potentialities, but among these we must
recognize the potentiality for getting into trouble. In any case, the
processes which make things reinforcing need to be closely
scrutinized.
The excessive consummation which leads to overweight,
overpopulation, and war is only one result of man’s sensitivity to
reinforcement. Another, often equally troublesome, is an
exhausting preoccupation with behavior which is only infrequently
consummated. A single reinforcement may generate and maintain
a great deal of behavior when it comes at the end of a sequence
or chain of responses. Chains of indeﬁnite length are constructed
in the laboratory by conditioning intermediate reinforcers. Teachers
and others use the same method for many practical purposes. We
may assume that something of the sort has occurred whenever we
observe long chains. The dedicated horticulturalist is ultimately
reinforced, say, by a ﬁnal perfect bloom, but all the behavior
leading up to it is not thereby explained; intermediate stages in
progressing toward a ﬁnal bloom must in some way have become
reinforcing. In order for early man to have discovered agriculture,
certain early stages of cultivation must first have been reinforced by
accident or at least under conditions irrelevant to the eventual
achievement.
The reinforcers we are considering generate many sequences of
this sort with troublesome results. Ultimate reinforcement is often
ridiculously out of proportion to the activity it sustains. Many hours
of careful labor on the part of a cook lead at last to brief stimulation
from a delicious food. A good wine reinforces months or years of
dedicated care. Brief sexual reinforcement follows a protracted
campaign of seduction (see, for example, Choderlos de Laclos’s
Les liaisons dangereuses [88] or Kierkegaard’s Diary of a Seducer
[81].) The campaign of the dedicated aggressor, domestic or
international, is often similarly protracted and suggests a long
history in which a chain has been built up. Problems of this sort can
be solved simply by breaking up the conditions under which long

chains are formed.
Another kind of exhausting preoccupation is due to intermittent
reinforcement. A single form of response is repeated again and
again, often at a very high rate, even though only infrequently
reinforced. Activities such as reading magazines and books, going
to the theatre, and watching television are examples. Such
behavior is often maintained by very infrequent reinforcement
provided the schedules have been carefully programmed.
Reinforcement is at ﬁrst relatively frequent, but the behavior
remains strong as the frequency is reduced. Thus, a television
program grows less and less reinforcing as the writer runs out of
themes or as the viewer no longer ﬁnds the same themes
interesting, but one who has followed a program from the
beginning may continue to watch it long after reinforcements have
become quite rare. The dishonest gambler prepares his victim by
steadily “stretching” the mean ratio in a variable ratio schedule.
Eventually the victim continues to play during a very long period
without reinforcement.
There are many natural systems which stretch ratios. As
addiction develops, the addict must take more and more of a drug
(and presumably work harder and harder to get it) for a given
effect. To the extent that novelty is important, all reinforcers grow
less effective with time. The gourmet is less often reinforced as
familiar foods begin to cloy. The ratio schedule of sexual
reinforcement is automatically stretched by satiation. The
enormities suffered by the heroine in de Sade’s Justine suggest
that her many persecutors were being reinforced on ratio
schedules severely strained by both aging and sexual exhaustion.
Frank Harris has suggested, in his biography of Oscar Wilde (60),
that the word “lead” in “lead us not into temptation” is an
unconscious recognition of the progression through which more
and more troublesome forms of behavior are approached.
Unwanted consequences are averted in all such cases by breaking
up the programs through which infrequent reinforcement comes to
sustain large quantities of behavior.

Arranging useful contingencies
We are usually interested—for example, in education—in getting
the greatest possible effect from weak reinforcers in short supply.
The problem here is just the reverse—we are to minimize the effect

of reinforcers which are all too abundant and powerful. Hence,
instead of systematically building up long chains of responses, we
prevent their formation, and instead of constructing programs which
make strained schedules effective we break them up. We can use
the same procedures in the more familiar direction, however, in
another solution to our problem. Reinforcers can be made
contingent on productive behavior to which they were not originally
related. Soldiers have often been induced to ﬁght skillfully and
energetically by arranging that victory will be followed by the
opportunity to plunder, rape, and slaughter. It has always been
particularly easy for the barbarian to mount an attack on a more
advanced civilization which emphasizes the delectations of food
and sex. It has been said, for example, that the wines of Italy (and
presumably her well-groomed and beautiful women) made Rome
particularly vulnerable. All governments make aggressive damage
to an enemy especially reinforcing to their soldiers with stories of
atrocities. Religious visions of another world have been made
reinforcing in the same modes. Many of the offerings to the gods
portrayed in Egyptian temples are edible, and Greek and Roman
gods were distinguished by their taste for ambrosia and nectar,
although less advanced civilizations have looked forward only to a
happy hunting ground. Sex has its place in the Muslim heaven
where men may expect to enjoy the attention of beautiful virgin
Huris, and some theologians have argued that one of the
attractions of the Christian heaven is the spectacle of sinners being
tormented in hell—a spectacle which, as portrayed, for example, in
t h e Inferno, competes successfully with the Roman circus at its
most violent.
Marriage is often described as a system in which unlimited sexual
contact with a selected partner is contingent on nonsexual
behavior useful to the culture—such as supporting and managing
a household and family and, following St. Paul’s famous principle,
forsaking sexual activity elsewhere. Women have often raised
moral standards with practices which were merely carried to an
extreme by Lysistrata. Educators use the basic reinforcers rather
timidly. Erasmus advocated cherries and cakes in place of the cane
in teaching children Greek and Latin, but he was the exception
rather than the rule. Homosexual reinforcement was explicit in
Greek education, however, and a sadistic or masochistic violence
has supported corporal punishment and competitive arrangements
among students down to modern times (152). Economic

transactions characteristically involve food, sex, and aggression
since money as a generalized reinforcer derives much of its power
when exchanged for them. In the nineteenth century it was
expected that wages would be exchanged primarily for food, and
charity was opposed on the grounds that the industrial system
needed a hungry labor force. Better working conditions have made
other reinforcers effective, but many of them are still related to sex
and aggression.
Reinforcers have, of course, a special place in art, music, and
literature. Their place in science is not always obvious. Max Weber
has argued, indeed, that the scientist is a product of the puritanical
solution—proﬁting, for example, from the scrupulous or meticulous
concern for exact detail generated by aversive consequences (the
etymologies of scrupulous and meticulous show punitive origins).
F e u e r (47) has recently shown, however, that almost all
outstanding men in science have followed a “hedonist ethic.”
A solution to our problem in which food, sex, and aggression are
made contingent on useful forms of behavior to which they are not
naturally related has much to recommend it. It should be
acceptable to the sybarite because he will not lack reinforcement. It
should also assuage the puritan, not only because objectionable
consequences which seem to call for punishment have been
attenuated but because a man must work for the reinforcers he
receives. It should not require any change in human behavior
through chemical, surgical, or even genetic means, since a natural
sensitivity to reinforcement is now useful rather than troublesome.
The solution has not yet been satisfactorily worked out, however.
The contingencies of positive reinforcement arranged by
governmental and religious agencies are primitive, and the
agencies continue to lean heavily on the puritanical solution.
Economic reinforcement might seem to represent an environmental
solution, but it is badly programmed and the results are
unsatisfactory for both the employer (since not much is done) and
the employee (since work is still work). Education and the
management of retardates and psychotics are still largely aversive.
In short, as we have seen, the most powerful forces bearing on
human behavior are not being effectively used.
The concept of drive or need is particularly at fault. We neglect
contingencies of reinforcement because we seek solutions to our
problems in the satisfaction of needs. “To each according to his

need” is the avowed goal of both an afﬂuent society and a welfare
state. If those who seem to have everything are still not happy, we
are forced to conclude that there must be less obvious needs
which are unsatisﬁed. Men must have spiritual as well as material
needs—for example, they must need someone or something
beyond themselves to believe in—and it is because these needs
are unfulﬁlled that life seems so often empty and man so often
rootless. This desperate move to preserve the concept of need is
unnecessary because a much more interesting and fruitful design
is possible.
Men are happy in an environment in which active, productive,
and creative behavior is reinforced in effective ways. The trouble
with both afﬂuent and welfare societies is that reinforcers are not
contingent on behavior. Men who are not reinforced for doing
anything do little or nothing. This is the “contentment” of the
Arcadian idyll and of the retired businessman. It may represent a
satisfaction of needs, but it raises other problems. Only when we
stop using reinforcers to allay needs can we begin to use them to
“fulfill man’s nature” in a much more important sense.

Note 3.1

Needs

We say that an organism needs food, a plant needs water, a
candle ﬂame needs oxygen, and a ﬂashlight needs a battery.
There is a common element in all four expressions: Because
something is lacking, a process cannot proceed or an effect be
achieved. But with animals and plants the need leads to action. A
hungry animal explores its environment in ways which increase its
chances of ﬁnding food or in ways which have previously been
reinforced by food. Its need is not only a shortage but a condition
in which certain behavior is likely to occur.
The two are presumably related through contingencies of survival
(see Chapter 7). The young infant responds to tactile stimulation
near its mouth, makes contact with its mother’s breast, and actively
nurses. It is well that the behavior should be strong when the infant
lacks nourishment, but it would be wasteful and even dangerous at
other times. There are similar reasons why food is particularly
reinforcing when an organism is hungry and why behavior
reinforced by food is then particularly strong.
Do we need the gustatory stimulation associated with nutritious
food? The Roman soldier under the Republic is said to have eaten

a cereal porridge and not much else. Was the porridge as
reinforcing as occasional sweets or roast meat, or were the spoils
of war therefore so much the more powerful in reinforcing the
behavior of making war, as some historians have claimed?
“Comfort” raises a comparable question: We escape from and
avoid aversive stimulation, but have we a need to do so? The
question is important in the design of a culture. Although the
physical environment will no doubt continue to operate by shaping
and maintaining responses which are basically avoidance or
escape even when its aversive properties have been minimized,
aversive social control may disappear. Will men then suffer from a
need for aversive stimulation or a need to behave in ways which
reduce it? After all, much of the behavioral endowment of the
human organism has been acquired in the process of avoiding
climatic extremes, predators, and enemies. What happens to this
endowment in a nonaversive environment? Perhaps the question
is of the same order of importance as what happens to the
physiological processes which restore a broken bone if one never
breaks a bone.
Is there another kind of need for aggression? Can we say that
man’s capacity to be reinforced by damage to others is out of line
with his condition in the world today when we have violence in our
streets and enemies abroad? These are indeed the kinds of
conditions which evoke aggressive behavior, and any change in
our culture which would make such behavior less effective may
appear to be threatening. But problems which seem to call for
solutions through remedial aggression often have aggressive
origins, and to moderate aggression is perhaps a necessary step in
discovering other solutions. A reduction in aversive practices in
education, for example, has proved to be the ﬁrst step toward the
discovery of effective alternatives. It may be that men make war as
a form of thrill-seeking. To go sailing when storm warnings are up or
to climb the most dangerous face of a mountain is to create
aversive stimuli in order to be reinforced by escaping from them.
The behavior does not mean that aversive stimulation is needed
but only that escape from it is reinforcing. Chefs and confectioners
have been busily at work for centuries creating particularly effective
gustatory stimuli, but this does not mean that such stimuli are
needed, but only that they are reinforcing.
Man is not “in bondage” to his needs; he is not “driven by greed

or lust.” If such statements can be paraphrased at all, he is in
bondage to the things which gratify his needs. But the term
bondage goes too far; the trouble is in the contingencies. The
greedy or lustful man is not suffering from deprivation (we do not
call a starving man greedy); he is suffering from a particularly
effective schedule of reinforcement. Don Giovanni is a classical
example. Although an inherited or pathological condition may make
a person “oversexed,” a Don Giovanni is more likely to be the
product of a particularly effective schedule. A moderate
susceptibility to sexual reinforcement should be enough to make
every attractive girl the occasion for attempted seduction if early
successes are favorably programmed. An effective variable-ratio
schedule should maintain the behavior at a high level even in a
person who is sexually below normal, in which case it might be
tempting to argue that the above-normal behavior shows
“compensation.”
Cotton Mather and many other Puritan divines spent much time
“wrestling with the devil.” Whether or not they took that metaphor
seriously (see Chapter 9), they were struggling to keep from
behaving in ways classiﬁed by their cultures as sinful. Their religion
taught them puritan techniques for the suppression of sexual,
gluttonous, and aggressive behaviors; but it is possible that a slight
change in a few cubic millimeters of tissue in the hypothalamus
would have permitted them to spend their time in more proﬁtable
and enjoyable ways. We can easily imagine making such a change
with the help of drugs, and electrical or surgical measures may not
be far off. But have the great spiritual triumphs been nothing more
than slight physiological rectiﬁcations? Certainly those who value
moral struggle will deny it. Yet it is quite possible that the devil who
is eventually vanquished is no more than a troublesome bit of
nerve tissue.
The environmental solution contrasts less sharply with the
puritan. It is characteristic of the puritan solution that it leads to a
time-consuming and wasteful struggle against which a biological
solution seems extraordinarily efﬁcient. An environmental solution
avoids the problem altogether; it leaves no room for struggle
because conﬂicts never arise. At the moment an environmental
solution may seem to be as far out of reach as a chemical, but the
environment need not be drastically changed. An important part of
that solution is to teach techniques of self-control in which the devil
could be said to be tricked rather than vanquished.

Note 3.2

The problem of leisure

It might have been argued in Chapter 2 that, thanks to progress
and technology, men do less and less to get the things they want
and that contingencies of reinforcement are therefore less and less
important in the design of a culture. Food, shelter, and protection
from predators and enemies were once secured only through long
hours of exhausting and often dangerous labor; but the invention
of clothing, housing, agriculture, and weapons has changed all
that (the acts of invention having been reinforced by the change).
It may eventually be unnecessary to do more than push a button
(an almost effortless electronic button at that) and since that will be
little more than wishing, contingencies can then, indeed, be
ignored. But that day is not yet here, nor are all contingencies so
easily disposed of. Social reinforcers, for example, are particularly
hard to analyse and arrange (and in part just because they have
been misused in solving the simpler problem; men have avoided
hard or dangerous work by getting others to work for them, just as
they have got some of the good things in life by stealing them).
And in any case, we still have to face the problem of what men do,
and enjoy doing, when it is not necessary to do anything.
What do they in fact do? Possibly little or nothing. Once satiated
and free from aversive stimulation man, like many other species,
becomes inactive and goes to sleep. But only for a while. Sleep
and inaction, with or without the support of drugs, will not take up
all the slack.
Some leisure-time behavior can be traced to reinforcers which
remain effective although there is no current deprivation. The
gourmand continues to eat although he no longer needs food in a
physiological sense, and the aggressive person damages others
although he is not threatened. The survival value of sexual
reinforcement concerns the species rather than the individual, and
consummation makes no lasting change in the strength of the
behavior. The man who is “at leisure,” therefore, may continue to
ﬁght, attack others, and copulate, and to engage in the precurrent
behaviors leading up to such activities.
Contingencies which do not involve consummation may also be
effective. The play of animals resembles serious behavior and is
often said to have survival value as a kind of practice. Some forms

of human play may have a comparable signiﬁcance. Men hunt and
ﬁsh for food which they do not eat, but they are then presumably
more skillful when they grow hungry. The capacity to be reinforced
by the successful manipulation of a medium, as in the arts and
crafts, may have survival value because it leads to behavior which
is
effective
when
more
speciﬁc
contingencies
arise.
Nonconsummatory behavior is also shown by listeners, readers,
and spectators. There are probably both phylogenic and ontogenic
reasons why men are reinforced as they watch others engage in
serious behavior—for example, in the aggressive and sexual
displays of the Roman circus and the modern theatre and cinema.
Nonconsummatory behavior may also be traced to generalized
reinforcers which are not followed by the primary reinforcers upon
which they are based. Money is the archetypal generalized
reinforcer, and men are reinforced by it even when they do not
exchange it for other things. The possibility of a generalized
negative reinforcement must also be considered; much of what is
called irrational or compulsive behavior has the form of avoidance
or escape in the absence of aversive stimuli.
Many drugs, of which alcohol is probably the best example, have
reinforcing consequences; and drug-taking is also common when
the serious business of life can be neglected. Some drugs simulate
the consequences of serious behavior, as in reducing aversive
stimulation, and may do so in a particularly powerful way when
addiction has developed.
It does not help to call these forms of leisure-time behavior
substitutes for, or sublimations of, behavior having a clearer
biological signiﬁcance. It simply happens that when the
environment has been altered so that major reinforcers are no
longer powerful, lesser reinforcers take over. A further principle
then comes into play: Weak reinforcers become powerful when
they are intermittently scheduled. The principle explains many
puzzling aspects of the behavior of men at leisure. It may seem
farfetched to say that a man is reinforced when playing solitaire by
the fact that he is successfully controlling his environment. The
control which is shown when a game “comes out” or when the play
of a single card makes that outcome more probable is far from
earthshaking. Nevertheless, such consequences maintain
behavior, often for hours, and they do so primarily because they
occur on the variable-ratio schedule determined by the rules of the
game. All systems of gambling employ variable-ratio schedules,

and it is not surprising that gambling rivals the consumption of
alcohol as the outstanding feature of cultures which have achieved
a good deal of leisure. Intermittent reinforcement also explains the
extent to which the other reinforcers mentioned above take over
when men do not “need to do anything.”
The design of leisure. It is not too difﬁcult to explain why men
have discovered and elaborated leisure-time activities. The
reinforcements which explain excessive consummation of food
explain as well the invention of new kinds of food by chefs and
confectioners. Drugs which reinforce behavior are presumably
discovered or created just because they reinforce search or
invention. Games of skill are invented because they sharpen the
contingencies of winning and losing, and games of chance
because they arrange effective variable-ratio schedules.
Spectacles are designed to please the spectators; and new forms
of art, literature, and music evolve because they reinforce the
producer on the one hand and the viewer, reader, or listener on
the other.
More surprising is the fact that cultures have from time to time
suppressed the nonessential behaviors which would otherwise
dominate leisure time. Excessive consummation has been
tabooed, drugs proscribed, and gambling made illegal. Simple
games of chance, dancing, and sports have been forbidden. Plato
dispensed with music and drama in his Republic. Curiosity about
nature and the resulting knowledge have been branded as sins.
The principle has been generalized; any behavior has been called
wrong if it leads to pleasure. Even essential behavior is not to be
enjoyed; one may hunt and kill if one is hungry, but it is wrong to
enjoy doing so.
Cultural restrictions upon what a man does at his leisure may be
explained if they prevent aversive consequences. Excessive
consummation and drugs are dangerous to health and have
injurious effects upon others. The gambler almost always loses in
the long run. Ethical and moral sanctions are involved; the devil
always has things for idle hands to do. Among them is simply doing
nothing. “Raising the wages of day laborers is wrong,” said Dr.
Johnson (25), “for it does not make them live better, but only
makes them idler, and idleness is a very bad thing for human
nature.” We recognize some of these reasons when we sacriﬁce

the pleasures of leisure in wartime or during periods of austerity
which are imposed to promote the common good.
But a culture which proscribes activities of this sort runs the risk
of disaffection. By deﬁnition, the suppression of any positively
reinforced behavior makes a way of life less reinforcing. To interfere
with the pursuit of pleasure is particularly resented. Why should a
man not be permitted to be a drunkard or a drug addict if he hurts
no one but himself? Why should he not gamble away his fortune if
he pleases? The more trivial the reinforcer, the greater the
resentment; innocent activities like card playing or dancing or
simply doing nothing should certainly be left to the individual.
But the question is: Can they be left to him? Are they not instead
left to contingencies which are either accidental or contrived by
enterprising people who stand to gain from them? When productive
contingencies become so efﬁcient that a great deal of time is left
for nonessentials, the strength of a culture depends upon what
happens in that time. Leisure-time activities do not by deﬁnition
give the culture much current support, but they have a bearing
upon its further development and upon its ability to meet
emergencies. A culture is not strengthened when its members do
nothing, consume excessively, use stultifying drugs, engage in the
repetitive behaviors of gambling, or merely watch others engaging
in serious behavior. The culture suffers in particular when these
contingencies prove inadequate and men then turn to the strong
reinforcers of aggression. The culture is clearly strengthened,
however, when its members turn to other kinds of leisure behavior.
Arts, crafts, and games develop important skills. Scientiﬁc
exploration and research (encouraged when governments,
foundations, and universities make it unnecessary for men to do
other things in order to survive) make an obvious contribution. The
nonscientiﬁc study of human behavior, as in history and literature,
promotes a useful understanding. (All these uses of leisure are
embodied in the concept of a liberal education.) Education can do
much more than it now does in this direction. It can teach the skills
exhibited by artists, musicians, and craftsmen. It can build a
sustained interest in literature as well as in the arts and music. It
can teach techniques of self-management (now largely abandoned
by religious and ethical agencies) which help the individual to avoid
drugs and excessive consummation and to resist the special
contingencies arranged by gambling systems. It can also teach the
skills and build the interests which will make productive work

reinforcing. Economic agencies may reduce aversive labor to a
minimum or reduce the aversive by-products of labor, as by
substituting positive inducement for coercive control, or making it
possible for men to earn their living by doing what they would do
anyway if support were forthcoming from other quarters.
The problem of leisure appears in a particularly acute form in
designing a way of life for the incarcerated, including those who
are forcedly incarcerated because they would otherwise harm
themselves or others (psychotics, retardates, and criminals), the
chronically ill, and those who work in isolated quarters such as
remote weather stations or interplanetary space ships. For all such
people the physical environment is necessarily limited, and the
social environment, if any, likely to suffer from the same limitations.
What contingencies can be designed which will provide “something
to do” during most of the waking hours? These are all challenging
problems for the specialist in contingency management.

II

AN ANALYSIS OF ONTOGENIC AND PHYLOGENIC
CONTINGENCIES

4

The experimental analysis of behavior

A natural datum in a science of behavior is the probability that a
given bit of behavior will occur at a given time. An experimental
analysis deals with that probability in terms of frequency or rate of
responding. Like probability, rate of responding would be a
meaningless concept if it were not possible to specify topography
of response in such a way that separate instances of an operant
can be counted. The speciﬁcation is usually made with the help of
a part of the apparatus—the “operandum”—which senses
occurrences of a response. In practice, responses so deﬁned show
a considerable uniformity as the organism moves about in a
framework set by its own anatomy and the immediate environment.
An emphasis on rate of occurrence of repeated instances of an
operant distinguishes the experimental analysis of behavior from
kinds of psychology which observe one or more of the following
practices.
(1) Behavior is taken merely as the sign or symptom of inner
activities, mental or physiological, which are regarded as the
principal subject matter. Rate of responding is signiﬁcant only
because it permits us to follow a process (such as learning or
maturation), or to determine a state or condition (such as an
excitatory tendency or alertness or wakefulness), to detect
available psychic energy or the strength of a drive or emotion, and
so on. The observed behavior is not expected to be very orderly. It
is only a rather noisy “performance,” from which presumably more
stable states and processes are to be inferred with the help of
statistical procedures. These practices have discouraged a careful
speciﬁcation of behavior, and the data obtained with them are
seldom helpful in evaluating probability of response as such.
(2) Behavior is held to be signiﬁcant only in meeting certain
standards or criteria. An organism is described as “adjusting to a
situation,” “solving a problem,” or “adapting to the environment.”
With respect to normative criteria its behavior may improve or
deteriorate; with respect to developmental criteria it may be
arrested or accelerated.
In reporting these aspects of behavior the experimenter may not
specify what the organism is actually doing, and a rate of
responding cannot be satisfactorily inferred.

(3) Changes in probability of response are treated as if they were
responses or acts. The organism is said to “discriminate,” to “form
concepts,” to “remember,” to “learn what to do” and, as a result,
“know what to do,” and so on. These are not, however, modes of
response. To discriminate is not to respond but to respond
differently to two or more stimuli. To say that an organism has
learned to discriminate between two stimuli is to report a possibly
useful fact, but it is not to say what the organism is actually doing.
(4) The dimensions studied, though quantiﬁable, are not related
in any simple way to probability of response. The force with which a
response is executed and the time which elapses between stimulus
and response—called, often inaccurately, latency or reaction time
—are popular measures. When they change under differential
reinforcement, they are relevant to an experimental analysis, but
they may not throw much light on probability. Other common
measures, such as the time required to complete a task—to get
through a maze, to solve a problem, or to cross out all letters of a
given kind on a page—or the number of errors made or the number
of trials taken in meeting a criterion are still less useful. “Amount
remembered,” an aspect of behavior ﬁrst emphasized by
Ebbinghaus, has recently enjoyed a renewed popularity. The
experimenter may want to know, for example, how a set of
responses come under the control of a corresponding set of stimuli,
but instead of following the change in probability he measures the
number of responses correctly emitted in recall at a later time.
An experiment is often designed so that the important result is a
ratio between two such measures, when the arbitrariness or
irrelevance of the aspects measured seems to cancel out. A ratio is
still of little help in an experimental analysis. Such measures are
chosen primarily because they are quantiﬁable—force of response
can be accurately recorded, number of trials exactly counted, and
elapsed time measured on the most accurate of clocks—but
quantiﬁability is not enough. Rate of responding is a basic
dimension, not simply because responses can be accurately
counted, but because rate is relevant to the central concern of a
science of behavior.
(5) The inner entities of which behavior is said to be a sign or
symptom include the traits, abilities, attitudes, faculties, and so on,
for which various techniques of psychological measurement have
been designed. But even the most impeccable statistical

techniques and the most cautious operational deﬁnitions will not
alter the fact that the “tests” from which the data are obtained are
very loosely controlled experimental spaces and that the “scores”
taken as measures have some of the arbitrary features just
mentioned. The important issues to which these techniques have
been directed—for example, the covariation in probability of groups
of responses—must be studied in other ways before the results will
be useful in an experimental analysis.
(6) Instead of observing behavior, the experimenter records and
studies a subject’s statement of what he would do under a given
set of circumstances, or his estimate of his chances of success, or
his impression of a prevailing set of contingencies of reinforcement,
or his evaluation of the magnitude of current variables. The
observation of behavior cannot be circumvented in this way,
because a subject cannot correctly describe either the probability
that he will respond or the variables affecting such a probability. If
he could, he could draw a cumulative record appropriate to a given
set of circumstances, but this appears to be out of the question
(see page 116).

The independent variables
One task of an experimental analysis is to discover all the variables
of which probability of response is a function. It is not an easy
assignment, but it is at least an explicit one. It distinguishes an
experimental analysis of behavior from other approaches at many
points.
(1) The stimulus is, of course, an important independent variable.
An early association with the concept of the reﬂex gave it, as we
have seen, the character of a goad, something which forced an
organism to respond. That was perhaps as wrong as the traditional
view that the organism forced the environment to stimulate—to
become visible, audible, and so on. The position of an
experimental analysis differs from that of traditional stimulusresponse psychologies or conditioned reﬂex formulations in which
the stimulus retains the character of an inexorable force. It does
not follow, however, that the organism acts upon the environment
in the manner suggested by terms like detect, identify, perceive,
experience, classify, and judge, or by terms which appear to
describe later responses to stimuli, such as recall how something
looked or remember what happened. Such terms, like expressions

borrowed from computer technology which describe the organism
as processing information, do not specify what the organism is
actually doing. The concept of the discriminative stimulus (the well
known “S D“) and the related notion of stimulus control assign to
stimuli a more reasonable role as independent variables.
An experimental analysis describes stimuli in the language of
physics. The experimenter does not ask whether a stimulus looks
the same to the organism as it does to him. In studying a
generalization gradient with respect to wave length of light, for
example, lights are sometimes matched for brightness, so that the
gradient will represent a reaction to color only; but this is an
unwarranted intrusion into the data. To guess what an organism
sees when a stimulus is presented and to suppose that what is
guessed is what is being presented would be to abandon all that
physics has to offer by way of specifying environmental events.
The importance of certain classical problems is not thereby denied.
Stimuli are often difﬁcult to specify in physical terms. Different
stimuli may appear to have the same effect and the same stimulus
different effects under different conditions. But it is no solution to
fall back upon the response of an experimenter to achieve some
sort of invariance. Similarly, any reference to “parameters relating to
the complexity of a task” or to “frustrating” or “anxiety-generating”
properties of a situation is also objectionable, whether the subject
or the experimenter serves as indicator of the complexity or the
emotion.
(2) Other independent variables are found in the classical ﬁelds
of motivation and emotion. The experimental analyst does not
manipulate inner states as such. He manipulates, not hunger, but
the intake of food; not fear as an acquired drive, but aversive
stimuli; not anxiety, but preaversive stimuli. He administers a drug,
not the physiological effects of a drug. He takes the age of an
organism, not a level of maturation, as a variable. He sometimes
uses a collateral dependent variable—but not as a measure. He
may use weight, for example, in lieu of a history of deprivation, but
it is simply another effect of deprivation, not a measure of hunger
as a state.
(3) Contingencies of reinforcement are an important feature of
the independent variables studied in an experimental analysis, but
many psychologists are unaware of the complexity of the
contingencies now commonly studied. In addition to many standard

schedules of reinforcement, reinforcement may be contingent on
rate of responding, rate of change in rate, or speciﬁc patterns of
rate changes detected by on-line computer analyses.
Contingencies may involve several stimuli and responses
interrelated in various ways. Considerable skill may be needed to
design programs of instructional contingencies which will bring
behavior under the control of complex terminal contingencies of
this sort. The importance of programming is, indeed, often
completely overlooked. For example, the statement that a given
type of organism or an organism of a given age “cannot solve a
given kind of problem” is meaningless until the speaker has
speciﬁed the programs which have been tried and considered the
possibility that better ones may be designed.
Describing a set of contingencies in instructions to the subject is
no substitute for exposing the subject to the contingencies,
particularly when they need to be programmed. Instructions have
effects, of course, depending in part on the verbal history of the
subject, but the behavior of a subject to whom an experimenter
has explained how a piece of apparatus works will not necessarily
resemble one who has come under the control of the terminal
contingencies established by that apparatus.
Contingencies of reinforcement have been analyzed formally in
theories of probability, decision-making, and games, but the
theorist often has no way of knowing, aside from observation of his
own behavior, what effects a given set of contingencies will have or
what kind of program may be needed to make it effective. Certain
assumptions—for example, that an organism will behave rationally
—are sometimes used in lieu of observations to complete a
statement of contingencies. Formal statements of contingencies,
like instructions, have their effects and if detailed enough may
supply rules which function as prior stimuli to control behavior
resembling that which would be generated by prolonged exposure
to the contingencies themselves. The two cases must, however, be
clearly distinguished. When an organism is brought under the
control of complex contingencies, it is not necessarily “applying the
rule” which describes them (see Chapter 6).

Treatment of relationships among variables
The behavioral processes studied in an experimental analysis
usually consist of changes in probability (or rate of response) as a

function of manipulated variables. The changes are followed in real
time rather than from “trial to trial”—a practice derived from
accidental features of early psychological research. An emphasis
on real time is another reason why cumulative records are useful.
(A cumulative record is sometimes used to “smooth” other kinds of
data—for example, the errors made during repeated trials in
learning a maze or in solving a problem—and it is often implied that
a cumulative record of responses in time also gains an
unwarranted smoothness of the same sort. The important
difference is that the slope of a cumulative curve in real time
represents a meaningful state of behavior.)
Relations among dependent and independent variables are
seldom explored according to a prior “experimental design,” as R.
A. Fisher used that term. The null hypothesis ﬁnds itself in the null
class. Research which is not designed to test hypotheses—
physiological, mentalistic, or conceptual—may seem puzzling to
those who identify statistics with scientiﬁc method, though it
appears perfectly reasonable to physicists, chemists, and most
biologists. The usual practice is to construct an experimental space
in which stimuli, responses, and reinforcements are interrelated in a
set of contingencies. The contingencies depend in part on the
behavior which the organism brings to the experiment. Provision is
usually made for changing the apparatus as the behavior changes,
but seldom according to a predetermined plan. The experimental
control of variables is emphasized rather than a later evaluation of
their presumed importance through statistical analyses. The
number of organisms studied is usually much smaller than in
statistical designs, but the length of time during which any one
organism is observed is usually much greater.
It is often said to be impossible to distinguish between signiﬁcant
and insigniﬁcant facts without a hypothesis or theory, but the
experimental analysis of behavior does not seem to bear this out. It
has progressed by building upon its past. Improved formulations
and techniques have led to more precise and reproducible data
over a much greater range, but not to the outright rejection of
earlier work. (For one thing, few data have become useless
because a theory they were designed to test has been discarded.)
In retrospect there appears to have been little random or aimless
exploration. Such a ﬁeld as the systematic analysis of
contingencies of reinforcement, for example, does not require a
theory. A study of schedules of reinforcement (46) can proceed in

a rather Baconian fashion, as a table of the possibilities generated
by combinations of clocks, counters, and speedometers, ﬁxed and
variable sequences, and so on is completed. Most of the
contingencies examined in theories of probability, decision-making,
and games can be generated in a similar way—the “theory,” if any,
being concerned with what organisms will do under the
contingencies analyzed. The experimental analysis of behavior
dispenses with theories of that sort by proceeding to find out.
In addition to the systematic manipulation of contingencies, the
interpretation of human affairs is a rich source of suggestions for
experiments. Do conditions detected in some episode in daily life
actually have the effects observed when more carefully controlled?
Can a certain history of reinforcement be shown to be responsible
for a current performance? What changes in contingencies will
have different and possibly more acceptable results? The guesses
and hunches with which the experimenter proceeds to answer
questions of this sort are not the formal hypotheses of scientiﬁc
method; they are simply tentative statements for which further
support is sought. The philosopher of science may still want to
reconstruct the behavior so that it ﬁts a hypothetico-deductive
model, but efforts in that direction grow less impressive—particularly
as an alternative formulation of the behavior of Man Thinking is
glimpsed as one of the more distant reaches of an experimental
analysis.
Research which enlarges an established corpus of facts or
simpliﬁes an effective formulation is usually less dramatic than
research which topples hypotheses or conﬁrms broad theories, but
it has its compensations. For those so inclined, theoretical activities
are by no means ruled out, even though scientiﬁc methodologists
have usually been hesitant in accepting the position adopted in an
experimental analysis. Quite aside from testing hypotheses, one
may look for simplifying uniformities. For example, one may develop
a theory as to why schedules of reinforcement have the effects
they have, seeking certain simplifying relations among the many
performances generated by different schedules. The conditions
which prevail at the precise moment of reinforcement are important,
but a better theory in this sense is no doubt possible and
desirable.
In representing the relationships discovered by an experimental
analysis of behavior, little use is made of metaphors or analogies

drawn from other sciences. Reports seldom contain expressions
l i k e encode, read out from storage, reverberating circuits,
overloaded channels, gating, pressure, ﬂow, drainage, networks,
centers, or cell assemblies. Little use is made of maps or schemata,
such as Tolman’s sow-bug, Lewin’s ﬁelds and vectors, or block
diagrams representing organisms as adaptive machines. The
advantage in representing processes without the use of metaphor,
map, or hypothetical structure is that one is not misled by a
spurious sense of order or rigor. Early in his career Freud wrote to
Fliess that he had put psychology on a ﬁrm neurological basis. The
theory permitted him “to see the details of neurosis all the way to
the very conditioning of consciousness” (49). His letter emphasized
number, structure, and terms borrowed from neurology, biology,
and physics. He spoke of “the three systems of neurones, the ‘free’
and ‘bound’ states of quantity, the primary and secondary
processes, the main trend and the compromise trend of the
nervous system, the two biological rules of attention and defense.”
Terms of this sort encourage euphoria, and Freud was vulnerable;
in his ﬁrst report he was “wildly enthusiastic.” Within a month or so
he had abandoned the theory. He had the insight to tell Fliess that
it seemed to him in retrospect “a kind of aberration.”

Attitudes toward research
The experimental analysis of behavior is also generally
characterized by an unhurried attitude toward the as-yetunanalyzed or the as-yet-unexplained. Criticism often takes the line
that the analysis is oversimpliﬁed, that it ignores important facts,
that a few obvious exceptions demonstrate that its formulations
cannot possibly be adequate, and so on. An understandable
reaction might be to stretch the available facts and principles in an
effort to cover more ground, but the general plan of the research
suggests another strategy. Unlike hypotheses, theories, and
models, together with the statistical manipulations of data which
support them, a smooth curve showing a change in probability of a
response as a function of a controlled variable is a fact in the bag,
and there is no need to worry about it as one goes in search of
others. The shortcomings and exceptions will be accounted for in
time. The strategy is supported by the history of early criticisms of
t h e Behavior of Organisms. It was said that the book was not
about organisms but about the rat, and very small groups of rats at

that. How could one be sure that other rats, let alone animals of
other species, would behave in the same way? Only food and
water were used as reinforcers, social reinforcers being
conspicuously lacking. The stimuli—lights and buzzers—were crude
and poorly controlled. Two levers should have been used so that
the data would throw light on behavior at a choice point. And, after
all, could we be sure that the rat was not pressing the lever simply
because it had nothing else to do? These criticisms have all been
answered without effort in the course of time simply as part of the
normal development of the analysis.
Patience with respect to unexplored parts of a ﬁeld is particularly
important in a science of behavior because, as part of our own
subject matter, we may be overwhelmed by the facts which remain
to be explained. Subtle illusions, tricks of memory, the ﬂashes
which solve problems—these are fascinating phenomena, but it
may be that genuine explanations within the framework of a
science of behavior, as distinguished from verbal principles or
“laws” or neurological hypotheses, are out of reach at the present
time. To insist that a science of behavior give a rigorous account of
such phenomena in its present state of knowledge is like asking
the Gilbert of 1600 to explain a magnetic ampliﬁer or the Faraday
of 1840 to explain superconductivity. Early physical scientists
enjoyed a natural simplification of their subject matters. Many of the
most subtle phenomena were to come into existence only through
technical advances in the sciences themselves. Others, though
occurring in nature, were not recognized as parts of their ﬁelds.
The behavioral scientist enjoys no such natural protection. He is
faced with the full range of the phenomena he studies. He must
therefore more explicitly resolve to put ﬁrst things ﬁrst, moving on to
more difficult things only when the power of his analysis permits.
A ﬁnal distinction. Those who engage in the experimental
analysis of behavior are usually conspicuous for their enthusiasm.
Bixenstine (16) has attributed an unwarranted optimism in all
behavioral science to the methodological position taken by
experimental analysts. This is perhaps to overestimate their
inﬂuence, but in any case, he points to the wrong cause. He
suggests that the optimism springs from release from the anxiety of
theory construction. There is a more obvious explanation: the
analysis works.

Note 4.1

Independent variables

The stimulus. To the psychophysicist psychology is “the analysis
of the stimulus.” Students of perception, particularly under the
inﬂuence of Gestalt psychology, emphasize the ways in which
stimuli force us to respond to them. Students of feelings and
emotion search for the things felt: hunger is stimulation arising from
stomach contractions and thirst from a dry throat. Obese people
eat more than normal because they are affected differently by
“cues,” and people are neurotic and psychotic because they see
the world in a different way.
This predilection for stimuli owes much to the secure dimensions
of physical things. Stimuli have duration and extent; they occupy
an unquestioned position in time and space; they exist before
anyone does anything about them and they survive afterwards. In
contrast, behavior is evanescent. What men do and say are things
of the moment. There is nothing left when a response has been
completed except the responding organism. The behavior itself has
gone off into history.
In spite of the fact that stimuli are thus reassuringly substantial,
the psychologist is nevertheless seldom willing to deal with them as
a physicist does. He shines a light into the eye of his subject as an
engineer might shine a light into a photocell, but he wants to talk
about what his cell—the organism—sees. Or he may inject a
reference to the organism’s history—for example, by calling a
stimulus “novel.” (“Familiar” more clearly refers to past history and
there have been those, among them Gestalt psychologists, who
have argued that familiarity is “in the stimulus.” Some of the kinds
of organization which are said to make stimuli particularly effective,
by forcing a corresponding organization in the behavior of
perceiving them, are also not physical properties. Past, present, or
future responses may be used to impute “meaning” to a stimulus.
(And nonmeaning as well; the nonsensical character of a list of
syllables is not a physical property.) Psycholinguists are particularly
likely to specify stimuli in terms of earlier contingencies in which
they have appeared. “Sequential probabilities,” “ambiguities,” and
“redundancies” are not “in the stimulus.” A more obvious appeal to
behavior is made in describing stimuli as anxiety provoking,
frustrating, confusing, and so on.
On the other hand, physical properties of stimuli are sometimes
invoked for the sake of objectivity or quantiﬁcation when they are

irrelevant. We accept the fact that not all properties of the
environment are worth specifying. Visual stimuli are not important
when our subject is blind, nor is electromagnetic radiation outside
the visible range when our subject has normal vision. But other
dimensions cannot be dismissed for such obvious reasons.
Suppose we are interested in how accurately a person can
estimate the number of spots on a page. The number ranges, say,
from one to one hundred. This is an objective fact, but the
numbers 1 to 100 do not therefore compose a single dimension of
the stimulus to which speed or accuracy of estimation can be
related. (For one thing the behavior of looking at a small number of
spots differs from the behavior of looking at a large number.) The
pattern of a maze and its length, like the pattern and length of a
list of nonsense syllables, is a physical fact, but not therefore
necessarily a useful property of a “stimulus.” (Overemphasis on
quantiﬁability causes trouble with other kinds of independent
variables. A “twenty-four-hour hunger” describes an objective
condition, which can be reproduced by other experimenters, but
twenty-four does not describe a quantity of hunger. “Number of
reinforced trials” is an objective but possibly useless measure of a
history of reinforcement.)
Uncontrollable independent variables. The ethologists study
behavior as a function of species status. A graylag goose behaves
in a given way because it is a graylag goose. To change the
behavior we should have to change the species. No matter how
important genetic variables may be, we do not manipulate them as
such in predicting and controlling the behavior of a given organism.
Age is not unrelated to genetic variables since most of the
behavior attributed to species status is not present at birth but
must mature, possibly during critical periods of development. Age is
taken as the principal independent variable in studying the
development of various sensory and motor skills and so-called
traits, concepts, and mental processes. The development of
speech, for example, is sometimes followed simply as an increase
with age in the number of words or grammatical forms a child uses.
Delinquent behavior in a given culture is said to show “a peak in
theft at fourteen and in rowdyism at seventeen.”
Cycles are another kind of temporal patterning. A squirrel runs
and rests in its squirrel cage, the stock market rises and falls, a
nation swings from a warlike to a peaceful mood and back, and

romantic periods of history alternate with classical. A progressive
change establishes a trend. Autocorrelational techniques can be
used to clarify cycles and trends, but unless we know that a cycle
will maintain its period or a trend continue, we cannot use the
results for purposes of prediction. Nor, of course, can time be
manipulated as an independent variable.
Controllable variables are also lacking when behavior is predicted
from other behavior. The tests used in mental measurement evoke
samples of behavior from which characteristics of similar behavior,
usually on a larger scale, can be predicted—but only because the
sample and the predicted behavior are functions of common
variables, usually not identiﬁed. The traits or factors extracted from
test scores seem to have the status of independent variables, but
they cannot be manipulated as such.

Note 4.2

The dependent variable

Topography of behavior can be recorded in many ways. The
graphic arts ﬁrst made it possible to represent an organism in
action, and ﬁlms and videoscopes are modern equivalents. The
alphabet was invented as a means of recording verbal behavior,
and the tape recorder now permits greater accuracy. A mere record
of topography, however, will not sufﬁce for a functional analysis.
We cannot break behavior into parts of convenient size on the
basis of topography alone. Thus, we cannot simply describe a bit
of behavior and call it an operant, even if everyone agrees to
abide by our speciﬁcations. Even in reﬂexes which have been
surgically isolated, the response must be deﬁned in terms of a
correlated stimulus (126). An operant must behave like one; it must
undergo orderly changes in probability when independent variables
are manipulated. The effect on the environment is such a variable,
and we can construct an operant by making reinforcement
contingent upon a given topography. But false starts are common;
what is taken as an operant may not behave like one and
something else may. In an apparatus containing two operanda, for
example, it may be necessary to consider not only the response to
each, but the behavior of changing from one to the other (134).
An explicit description of topography is sometimes avoided by
characterizing the dependent variable in more general terms. For
example, behavior is classiﬁed as procreative, maternal, or

combative. Classiﬁcations of this sort always involve independent
variables. The topography of ﬁghting, copulating, and caring for
young is usually related to phylogenic and ontogenic variables
which deﬁne useful classes, but this is not always true, and even
so the consequences of behavior—together with their phylogenic
or ontogenic significance—are involved.
Emphasis naturally falls on topography when behavior is studied
as a function of the inaccessible or uncontrollable variables already
mentioned. There are established ﬁelds in which the description of
behavior is mainly narration. Ethology tells us how a bird of a given
species builds its nest, courts its mate, and defends its territory.
Developmental psychology tells us how a baby of a given age
raises its head, turns over, and grasps objects. If the important
independent variables are indeed only to be found in the
phylogeny of the species or in age, this is perhaps all that can be
done. But it is a mistake to conﬁne an analysis to the structure of
behavior when other variables are available.
An emphasis on topography of behavior at the expense of
controlling relations is an example of the Formalistic Fallacy. It is
common in linguistics and psycholinguistics. By rearranging
fragments of recorded verbal behavior (e.g. “words”) new records
(e.g. “sentences”) are generated, which are then treated as though
they were verbal responses. By adding not to It is raining, for
example, we generate It is not raining, and we may proceed to test
its truth or falsity. But no one has yet said It is not raining, except in
reading the words thus arranged, and a textual response is not
true or false but merely accurate or inaccurate. The generated
“sentence” looks like a record of verbal behavior but the behavior it
appears to record has never been emitted under the control of
characteristic variables. There is a great difference between the
response It is raining written in the presence of appropriate stimuli
and the same pattern produced by rearranging words on slips of
paper.
The Formalistic Fallacy is most damaging when verbal behavior is
analyzed as if it were generated through the application of rules.
This is most likely to happen when verbal behavior is studied as a
function of uncontrollable variables, since contingencies of
reinforcement are not then available as an alternative to the
generation of behavior from rules (see Chapter 6). In a study of
“the child’s acquisition of syntax” Bellugi and Brown (14) recorded
the appearance of new words and new grammatical structures in

the speech of two children over a period of time. As an example of
a “generative” rule, they give the following: “In order to form a noun
phrase select ﬁrst one word from the small class of modiﬁers and
select, second, one word from the large class of nouns.” Thus, to
say My hand the child ﬁrst selects my from a list of modiﬁers and
then hand from a list of nouns. No reference is made to the relation
of the “generated” phrase to the circumstances under which it is
acquired or emitted. How often has the child echoed the verbal
stimulus my hand? How often has he heard stories in which
characters referred to their hands? How often has he heard hand
when his own hand has been important as a stimulus—when, for
example, it has been hurt, touched, washed, or shaken? What
verbal history has sharpened the distinction between my and your?
How many other responses containing hand and my has the child
already learned? It seems safe to overlook all this material if the
child selects words and puts them together to compose phrases or
sentences by applying rules with the help of a mental mechanism.
But selection and composition in that sense are rare forms of
verbal behavior, characteristic mainly of logicians, linguists, and
psycholinguists. Only the Formalistic Fallacy suggests that the
products of selection and composition are equivalent to the
behavior acquired under the contingencies arranged by a verbal
community.
Probability of response. A further qualiﬁcation of the dependent
variable in a science of behavior is needed. We are not so much
concerned with the topography of a response as with the
probability that it will be emitted. Probability is a difﬁcult concept.
For many purposes we may be content with rate of responding, but
this is awkward when a single instance of behavior is attributed to
more than one variable. Similar problems arise, together with many
others, when probability is inferred from the occurrence or
nonoccurrence of a response in a given “trial.” Behavior at a choice
point does not provide independent measures of the probabilities
associated with the choices. A rat may turn right rather than left in
a T-maze, but we can infer only that a right turn was more probable
than a left. The percentage of right or left turns in a series of trials
will not complete the account because the organism presumably
changes from trial to trial, and averages for groups of rats exposed
to the same contingencies are still less useful.

A common practice is to evaluate probability of response in terms
of the magnitude of an independent variable. A response evoked
by a brief stimulus, for example, is felt to be stronger than one
which requires a longer exposure. The probability seems to lie on a
continuum between the time which guarantees a response and the
time at which no appropriate response is ever made. Similar
continua seem to be established by making stimuli incomplete—as
by omitting letters in a text, ﬁltering out some frequencies in
recorded speech, or putting visual stimuli out of focus. The
probability is inferred from the point at which the response fails to
occur as the duration, clarity, or completeness of the stimulus is
reduced. In psychoanalytic theory a response is inferred to have
unusual strength if it occurs when it is not particularly appropriate to
the occasion. Rorschach patterns and the vague auditory stimuli of
the Verbal Summator (127) are presumed to evoke responses
having special strength.
Probability of response is also sometimes inferred from how
quickly the response is acquired or brought under stimulus control.
If a response of complex topography is acquired only slowly, it is
assumed that it began in very low strength. When an organism has
been conditioned to respond to a given pattern, the probability that
it will respond to a different pattern is sometimes argued from the
speed with which it forms a discrimination. If it learns to distinguish
patterns quickly, it is assumed that learning to respond to one
pattern does not make a response to the other highly probable.
Speed of learning is also sometimes used to measure probability
attributed to deprivation or aversive stimulation.
Speed of forgetting is also, as we have noted, used to infer
probability; a response which can be recalled a long time after
acquisition is presumed to have been stronger when acquired. The
principle is also basic to psychoanalysis; the responses we now
recall were the strong responses of long ago. Further information
can be extracted by varying the conditions under which recall
occurs. A recollection which has little relevance to a current
situation suggests unusual strength. A response recalled in the
presence of distractions or conﬂicting variables is also held to be
strong. (The number of psychological experiments which use
“amount remembered” as a dependent variable is not to be taken
as showing an extraordinary interest in the process of forgetting,
for many of them are concerned with processes which could be

more directly investigated with measures of probability.)
Behavior as a dependent variable is often neglected when the
investigator turns his attention to internal processes, real or
fancied. The study of verbal learning, for example, is more likely to
be concerned with proactive and retroactive inhibition,
reminiscence, or obliviscence than with the actual behavior of the
subject, which is often not carefully analyzed. Behavior studied as
a function of time—as growth, development, trends, or cycles—also
often takes second place to supposed underlying processes. And
no matter how elegant the mathematical procedures used in
quantifying traits and abilities, they are almost always applied to
relatively crude measures (for example, responses to a
questionnaire) evoked under relatively uncontrolled conditions (the
questionnaire). The emphasis is not upon the behavior but upon
what seems to lie behind it.

Note 4.3

Significance

The psychological literature contains a prodigious number of
charts, graphs, tables, and equations reporting quantitative
relations among unimportant or useless variables. Much of this may
be attributed to professional contingencies of reinforcement, under
which what a psychologist says must be above all irrefutable. He
can satisfy the contingencies by selecting a measurable aspect of
behavior and a measurable condition and examining the relation
between them. If he uses the right instruments and treats his data
in the right ways, his result will be statistically “signiﬁcant” even
when no relation is found. The signiﬁcance can be increased by
devising a hypothesis which the result conﬁrms or disproves or a
general principle which it illustrates. The main thing is to avoid
being wrong.
There are no contingencies in which positive results ﬁgure in a
comparable way. Scientiﬁc progress is usually slow, and an
important step is not necessarily recognized as such as soon as it
is taken. Only a few discoveries are sudden enough to be
contingent upon the scientist’s investigatory behavior in such a way
as to shape and maintain it. The dedication of the scientist is
usually the product of a favorable program of weak reinforcements.
Additional sources of reinforcement are therefore important. The
experimental analysis of behavior has no doubt proﬁted from the
fact that its results have led rather quickly to a behavioral

technology, but the laboratory scientist proﬁts from any result which
clariﬁes his central conception. It is reinforcing to ﬁnd variables
which change in an orderly fashion and which permit one to
formulate behavior as a scientiﬁc system, in the sense in which that
term was used, for example, by Willard Gibbs.
A concern for basic dimensions helps the young psychologist in
another way. When Freud ﬁrst turned from biology to
psychoanalysis, he wrote to a friend (49): “What horriﬁes me more
than anything else is all the psychology I shall have to read in the
next few years.” The literature faced by the young psychologist
today is several thousand times as extensive. It cannot be read as
a whole. A ﬁeld of specialization helps, but most ﬁelds are still
large. Some principle of selection is needed, and a useful guide is
the signiﬁcance of the variables studied. A glimpse of the
coordinates of the graphs in an article will usually sufﬁce. A good
rule of thumb is as follows: do not spend much time on articles in
which changes in behavior are followed from trial to trial or in which
graphs show changes in the time or number of errors required to
reach a criterion, or in amount remembered, or in percent of correct
choices made, or which report scores, raw or standard. Sometimes
a look at the apparatus will help. Dimensions are probably suspect
if the work was done with mazes, T-mazes, jumping stands, or
memory drums. The young psychologist will miss something in
following these rules (he will ﬁnd something of value almost
everywhere), but he must run some risk. It is a matter of personal
strategy, and an emphasis on basic dimensions makes it possible
to plan a promising campaign.

Note 4.4

Progress

This is not the place for a survey of data, but some indication of
the technical progress which has been made in the experimental
analysis of behavior may be useful. Current practices contrast
sharply with those reported thirty years ago in The Behavior of
Organisms (129).
(1) The experimental space is more carefully controlled. Many
versions have been standardized.
(2) Experiments last, not for an hour, but for many hours, days,
weeks, or even months.
(3) The past history of the organism is more carefully controlled,
possibly from birth.

(4) Many more species have been studied, including man
(retardates, psychotics, normal children, and normal adults).
(5) Stimuli are more precisely controlled.
(6) Topography of response, including intensive and temporal
properties, is more accurately reported and measured.
(7) An operant as a class or response is better deﬁned and
cumulative records are therefore smoother.
(8) Many more reinforcers have been studied—including, in
addition to food and water, sexual stimulation, the opportunity to
behave aggressively, and the production of novel stimuli.
(9) Rate of responding continues to be represented in a
cumulative record, but details are clariﬁed in analyses of
interresponse times and with on-line computer processing—the
latter, in particular, when contingencies are based on
characteristics of rate or changes in rate.
(10) Many more schedules of intermittent reinforcement have
been studied.
(11) Concurrent and sequential arrangements of contingencies
permit the study of aspects of behavior which were once attributed
to higher mental processes, among them many which bear upon
decision-making.
(12) The experimental space often contains two or more
organisms with interlocking contingencies which generate “synthetic
social relations.”

Note 4.5

A technology of behavior

Science and technology have always been closely interwoven.
Practical problems are often solved ﬁrst, and the solutions are then
taken over by basic science; the craftsman’s rules of thumb are the
beginnings of scientiﬁc laws, as Ernst Mach pointed out long ago.
On the other hand, as basic research ﬂourishes, its methods and
results come to be applied to practical affairs. Much of the
technology which emerges may have no earlier rule-of-thumb
counterpart. Psychology offers many examples. Techniques of
mental measurement were invented to solve practical problems in
education and only later came to be used in basic analyses of
traits and abilities. Introspective psychology, on the other hand,
emerged from philosophical inquiries into the nature of man’s
knowledge of the world around him, but it gave rise to instruments

and methods which were later used to solve practical problems in
adjusting to that world. Studies in learning (and in teaching and
training) have almost always been a mixture of basic and applied
research.
The technological successes of psychology have not, however,
been remarkable. The psychologist often ﬁnds himself in a
subordinate position; he supplies information but plays little or no
part in its use. He determines the facts upon which decisions are
made but takes no part in making them. Clinical psychologists often
ﬁnd themselves in this position with respect to psychiatrists. School
psychologists report to the teacher or administrator who takes
action. It is the statesman or politician who uses the results of
opinion polls, and boards of directors who plan production in the
light of market analyses. When a psychologist occasionally moves
into a decision-making spot, he is usually no longer regarded as a
psychologist. Possibly this only shows good judgment; the
psychologist knows what he knows and is unwilling to take
responsibility for acting upon it. Another explanation is to be found
in the history of psychology. No other science has ever had to
move against such a mass of folklore, superstition, and error; and it
is not surprising that psychologists have put a high price on the
factual and objective. They have struggled assiduously to escape
from the limitations of personal experience. Measurement and
quantiﬁcation—in a word, objectivity—have been at a premium. If
you want to know what a man actually hears or sees, control the
stimulating environment. If you want to know what he actually does
or says, record his behavior as precisely as possible. If you want to
know what he is inclined to do or say, sample his opinions and
beliefs. If you want to know what he is really like, quantify his
behavior with inventories, questionnaires, and tests. Guarantee the
signiﬁcance of your answers by examining many cases, and draw
your conclusions only with the help of logical and statistical
methods.
The social sciences have also advanced beyond earlier
treatments of their subject matters mainly by emphasizing
objectivity. The social scientist has been called the man with a
notebook—observing, sampling, recording what he sees, rather
than trusting to casual impression and memory. Even historians
have entered upon a phase of this kind, searching for materials
which can be treated statistically in lieu of the personal
reminiscences of eyewitnesses. The result tends to be a form of

structuralism (see page 12) or behavioralism (see page 13) where
the emphasis falls on topography to the virtual exclusion of
independent variables. It is not surprising that the use of the
results should remain in other hands.
There is another result. Psychology as a basic science has failed
to supply a conception which recommends itself to specialists in
other ﬁelds of human behavior. Sociology, anthropology, law and
jurisprudence, economics, education, political science, religion,
linguistics, literary criticism, philosophy, history—each has its own
theory, model, or conception of man, drawn in part from common
sense and in part from outmoded philosophical systems, with local
improvisations as needed. A formula evolved in one ﬁeld proves
awkward in another. The student whose behavior is the concern of
the educational specialist bears little resemblance to Economic
Man. Man the Political Animal is not a promising patient in
psychotherapy. Yet it is the same man who is being studied in all
these ﬁelds, and it ought to be possible to talk about him in the
same way. Psychoanalysis has come closest to supplying a
common formulation, but it arose as a form of therapy and some
touch of psychopathology survives when it is applied to everyday
life. In spite of many claims to the contrary, it has not contributed a
workable theory which is generally useful.
The experimental analysis of behavior may be on the point of
doing so. The scientiﬁc method which has made it successful in the
laboratory makes it almost immediately available for practical
purposes. It is not concerned with testing theories but with directly
modifying behavior. Its procedures are therefore relevant whenever
a change in behavior is a consideration. It is less interested in the
topography or structure of behavior than in the variables of which it
is a function. It usually conﬁnes itself to the more convenient
variables, but the interaction between organism and environment
represented by the concept of contingencies of reinforcement has
great generality. A particular ﬁeld no doubt calls for special
knowledge and will bring new discoveries, but a basic conception
common to all fields is nevertheless a possibility.
Although a technology of behavior is thus in the making, we are
not on the verge of solving all our problems. Human behavior is
extraordinarily complex (it is no doubt the most complex subject
matter ever submitted to scientiﬁc analysis), and a great deal
remains to be learned. Technical knowledge is needed. We cannot

deal effectively with human behavior by applying a few general
principles (say, of reward and punishment) any more than we can
build a bridge simply by applying the principles of stress and strain.
The two ﬁelds in which an experimental analysis of behavior has
already yielded the most extensive technology (education and
psychotherapy) are those closest to psychology itself and hence
those to which specialists in behavior are most likely to turn. Even
there, however, a strong tradition favoring pure research keeps
many of those who would be most successful away from technical
applications. Elsewhere much of what is known has not yet been
put to use because those who are in a position to use it either do
not know that it is available or are put off by misunderstandings of
its nature or its implications. A new kind of professional training,
preferably with laboratory experience, is needed. In the long run,
the effective management of human affairs will probably require a
change in the way in which everyone thinks about himself and
those with whom he comes into contact.
The need for an effective technology of behavior is obvious
enough. Every generation seems to believe that the world is going
to the dogs, but (to be ethological for a moment) we must also not
forget the boy who cried Wolf! It is quite possible that we are in
serious trouble. Man may be foolish enough to set off a nuclear
holocaust—not by design but by one of those accidents which are
so much admired by those who oppose design. We have not yet
brought the powerful methodology of science to bear on many of
our problems. Prescientiﬁc formulations of human behavior are still
widely used, and supported by prescientiﬁc philosophies. A
sweeping change is needed, and a successful science of behavior
is perhaps the necessary first step.

Note 4.6

The critics

The experimental analysis of behavior is misunderstood in many
ways and for many reasons, particularly in its implications for
human affairs. With respect to its use in education, Paul Goodman
writes (56): “To be candid, I think operant-conditioning is vastly
overrated. It teaches us the not newsy proposition that if an animal
is deprived of its natural environment and society, sensorily
deprived, made mildly anxious, and restricted to the narrowest
possible spontaneous motion, it will emotionally identify with its
oppressor and respond—with low-grade grace, energy, and

intelligence—in the only way allowed to it. The poor beast must do
something, just to live on a little.” Jules Henry, an anthropologist,
has commented on “the uncritical extrapolation of experimental
results from animals to man” in the following way: “Learning theory
has two simple points to make and does so with talmudic ingenuity,
variability, intricacy, and insistence. They are reinforcement and
extinction. What has to be left out, because the subjects are mostly
animals, is thought” (63). It would be interesting to try to apply
these analyses to an issue of the Journal of the Experimental
Analysis of Behavior.
Classroom demonstrations are often cited as if they epitomized
the analysis. Pigeons have been taught to play a kind of pingp o n g (146) and simple tunes on a toy piano, and these trivial
achievements are offered as representing the nature and scope of
operant conditioning. The analysis is often dismissed as “all a
matter of conditioned reﬂexes” or of “habit formation in mazes.”
Reinforcement is sometimes said to be synonymous with reward or
bribery or necessarily a matter of drive reduction. The range of the
analysis is not recognized. Krutch (87) has argued that conditioned
reflexes “shortcircuit” important processes in human behavior, which
are presumably out of reach of a behavioral analysis. Ashby has
written (6):
Children do behave like pigeons. And this is why the technique is
so dangerous. Pigeons can be taught to play the piano but they
cannot be taught to understand music; and except for very limited
purposes (such as the memorizing of telephone numbers) rote
learning without understanding is useless. Now the chief weakness
of programmed instruction is that it rewards rote learning, and
worse than that—it rewards only those responses which are in
agreement with the programme. The doubter, the dissenter, the
questioner—in short, anyone with an original mind—can get no
stimulus or satisfaction out of the programme. Furthermore, it is the
declared aim of those who compose programmes to make the
steps so simple that the learner does not make mistakes, and so
gets his reinforcement at every step. But making mistakes is an
essential experience in learning.
But the behavior involved in understanding music can be analyzed
experimentally, operant conditioning is not rote learning, programs
can promote original behavior, and what is learned from making

mistakes can be taught in other ways (155). Problem solving,
creative thinking, intellectual and ethical self-management, and
behavior governed by rules are also often said to be out of reach.
Some of these will be discussed in Chapters 5 and 6. A very
common complaint, to which we shall return in Chapter 8, is that
consciousness is “ignored.”
An experimental analysis of behavior is necessarily a science in
progress. The assertion that it cannot explain some aspect of
behavior must be qualiﬁed with the phrase “as of this date.” The
analysis has grown steadily more rigorous and powerful, and it is
constantly reaching into new areas, but it no doubt has a long way
to go. We do not dismiss the early stages of other sciences
because they were not complete. Boyle’s Law, as originally stated,
was quite inadequate and had to be changed as other variables
were considered and as more exact measures were taken. It was
not discarded, however; it was simply qualified and extended.
The use of concepts and laws derived from an experimental
analysis in the interpretation of daily life is also a source of
misunderstanding. An analogy from another science may be
helpful. Geophysics interprets the present condition of the
accessible parts of the earth in terms of presumed conditions in the
mantle and core. It appeals quite freely to physical laws derived
from laboratory analyses of matter under various pressures and
temperatures, even though it is merely an assumption that
comparable states actually prevail in the interior of the earth. In the
same way familiar facts about verbal behavior are interpreted with
principles derived from the laboratory study of contingencies of
reinforcement (141), even though the contingencies maintained by
the verbal environment cannot be precisely ascertained. In both
these examples, principles derived from research conducted under
the favorable conditions of the laboratory are used to give a
plausible account of facts which are not at the moment under
experimental control. Neither account can at the present time be
proved, but both are to be preferred to treatments which lack the
same kind of experimental support.
Another common misunderstanding concerns extrapolation from
animal to human behavior. Those who study living organisms—say,
in genetics, embryology, or medicine—usually start below the
human level, and students of behavior have quite naturally
followed the same practice. The experimenter needs an organism

which is readily available and cheaply maintained. He must submit
it to daily regimens, often for long periods of time, conﬁne it in
easily controlled environments, and expose it to complex
contingencies of reinforcement. Such organisms are almost
necessarily simpler than men. Nevertheless, with very few
exceptions, those who study them are primarily concerned with
human behavior. Very few people are interested in the rat or
pigeon for their own sakes.
The relevance of research on lower organisms to human
behavior is sometimes ﬂatly denied. Jules Henry, for example, has
written, “When I extrapolate the laws of rat or pigeon learning to
man, I break the law of homologous extrapolation because rats
and pigeons are not homologous with man” (63). It turns out,
however, that two species are homologous only if laws can be
extrapolated from one to the other. Another writer has argued that
although “theories … based on experimentation with pigeons
[have] had considerable inﬂuence for good in education and
clinical psychology … yet it seems likely that … pigeon results will
be too simplistic for extensive use with humans” (6). This is almost
certainly correct, since differences must always be taken into
account, but useful similarities have been demonstrated over a
fairly wide range of species. The fact is that methods ﬁrst
developed for the study of lower organisms, as well as the
concepts and principles arising from that study, have been
successfully applied to human behavior, both in a basic analysis
and in many technological applications.
Although it is sometimes said that research on lower animals
makes it impossible to discover what is distinctly human, it is only by
studying the behavior of lower animals that we can tell what is
distinctly human. The range of what has seemed to be human has
been progressively reduced as lower organisms have come to be
better understood. What survives is, of course, of the greatest
importance. It must be investigated with human subjects. There is
no evidence that research on lower organisms contaminates
research on men or that those who study animals can have
nothing important to say about men.
It is frequently implied that human dignity is threatened when
principles derived from the study of lower animals are applied to
man; but if we really believe that the proper study of mankind is
man, we must not reject any relevant information. The use of
animal vaccines in the treatment and prevention of human illness

was once attacked on grounds of dignity, but medical science
without the help of animal research is unthinkable. We not only
study the endocrine systems of animals and apply the results to
man, we use animal hormones.
A similar concern for human worth or dignity underlies a common
misunderstanding of the practices of a scientiﬁc analysis. As
Bannister has put it (10):
In order to behave like scientists we must construct situations in which our subjects are
totally controlled, manipulated and measured. We must cut our subjects down to size. We
construct situations in which they can behave as little like human beings as possible and we
do this in order to allow ourselves to make statements about the nature of their humanity. I
can think of no simple formula which can allow us to escape from this paradox but I think we
might have the decency to acknowledge its presence. We ought not to use the curious notions
of reductionism in order to try to convince ourselves that our chaining of our subjects is the
ideal way to go about things. It may be that an imprisoned, miniscule man is all we are
capable of studying but let us acknowledge that we do miserable experiments because we
lack the imagination to do better ones, not claim that these are scientiﬁcally ideal because
they are simple minded.

The experimental analysis of behavior is, of course, an analysis.
The environment in which human behavior is observed is usually
simplified so that one aspect (or at most a very few aspects) can be
studied at one time. What we observe may not be very much like
the behavior we see in the confusion of daily life, but it is still
human behavior.
Simpliﬁcation of the human environment is not an exclusively
scientiﬁc practice. Artists, composers, writers, and scientists
characteristically maximize the quality and quantity of their work by
isolating themselves from unrelated features of the world about
them. They build physical and social environments appropriate to a
small part of their repertoires, and it is one of the objects of doing
so that the behavior thus maximized should not closely resemble
the behavior we meet with in daily life. We do not say that they
have “cut themselves down to size” or “are behaving as little like
human beings as possible” or that “they have imprisoned
themselves as minuscule men,” or that what they do is “all they are
capable of doing.” It is true that we often particularly admire those
who think best in the heat of battle or who paint or compose or
write in the wild abandon of a misspent life, for they must be
unusual people to work under such circumstances and their work

may be closer to real life; but though their achievements differ from
those of the solitary worker, they will be no more human.
As the techniques of an experimental analysis of behavior
become more powerful, more and more complex behavior is
analyzed under more and more complex circumstances. We ignore
some things for the sake of studying others, but we do not ignore
them permanently. They will be studied in their turn. Nothing is lost
in the process of analysis which can not be reconstituted. Every
science has been subjected to similar criticisms at some time in its
history; its methods have seemed to destroy the holistic aspects of
its subject matter. But more and more of that subject matter is
eventually accounted for.
The fact that it is hard to see what is happening in an
experimental space (see page 9) should be carefully considered by
those who object to the extrapolation of laboratory results to
human affairs. Presumably they object because the extrapolations
do not jibe with their observations of the world at large, but if we
now ask them to look at the world in small, we shall ﬁnd that their
observations do not jibe with what we know to be the case. We
know it because we have constructed the contingencies and can
analyze their effects under especially advantageous conditions. It
is quite possible that so many people have said so many different
things about the world at large just because none of them has ever
been able to conﬁrm what he thinks he has seen. We extrapolate
from relatively simple conditions to relatively complex, not to conﬁrm
what someone claims to have seen in the complex case, but to
begin for the first time to see it in a new light.
Terminology is another common source of misunderstanding.
When speaking or writing casually, the student of behavior is
perhaps as likely as anyone else to mention sensations, feelings,
ideas, thoughts, decisions, and so on. Critics sometimes cite
instances of this to prove inconsistency, lack of logic, or bad faith.
The astronomer is similarly inconsistent when he says that the sun
rises or that the stars come out at night, but he would be a foolish
astronomer indeed if he avoided such expressions in casual
discourse. No one should be seriously misled by such expressions
as “The idea occurred to me …,” “My memory of him is rather vague
…,” or “I don’t feel like going….” When early astronomers were
challenged, as they must have been when they continued to
speak of the sunrise, their answer was presumably a quick
translation into nongeocentric terms. The student of behavior must

also be ready to translate if challenged, and in any serious
enterprise he should be alert to the danger in unanalyzed, casual
terms.
Another criticism of an experimental analysis of behavior is that it
“apes” other sciences. This is not true. It adopts the basic scientiﬁc
assumption of order and lawfulness in its subject matter, and it
freely borrows any method which may be relevant to its subject
matter, but it does not do this in order to resemble more prestigious
sciences. Compared with information-theory or cybernetics,
mathematical models, hypothetico-deductive systems, computer
simulation, and general systems theory, it is unusually free of
scientiﬁc role playing. It is in no hurry to be mathematical. Newton’s
brilliant success in putting order into a chaotic universe led men
almost immediately to wonder whether the same thing might not be
done for human behavior and society. Within a century JeanJacques Rousseau could exclaim, “Calculators, it is now up to you.
Count, measure, compare.” (It is tempting to suppose that he was
clairvoyant, and that “calculateurs“ meant “computers.”) Another
century and Gustav Fechner jumped out of bed with the exciting
thought that the physical world and the world of the psyche might
b e mathematically related. Another century and mathematical
psychology sustains the hope of avoiding the sheer labor of an
empirical analysis—an analysis which is needed if we are to identify
the entities and the relations among them which are to be treated
mathematically.

5

Operant behavior

Purpose and behavior
We are interested in the behavior of an organism because of its
effects on the environment. (One effect on the social environment
is, of course, the arousal of our interest.) Some effects seem to
throw light on the behavior which produces them, but their
explanatory role has been clouded by the fact that they follow the
behavior and therefore raise the specter of teleology.
An attempt has been made to solve the problem by creating a
prior surrogate of a given effect. A quality or property of purpose is
assigned to behavior to bring “what the organism is behaving for”
into the effective present; or the organism is said to behave in a
given way because it intends to achieve, or expects to have, a
given effect; or its behavior is characterized as possessing utility to
the extent that it maximizes or minimizes certain effects. The
teleological problem is, of course, not solved until we have
answered certain questions: what gives an action its purpose, what
leads an organism to expect to have an effect, how is utility
represented in behavior?
The answers to such questions are eventually to be found in
past instances in which similar behavior has been effective. The
original problem can be solved directly in the same way.
Thorndike’s Law of Effect was a step in that direction: the
approximately simultaneous occurrence of a response and certain
environmental events (usually generated by it) changes the
responding organism, increasing the probability that responses of
the same sort will occur again. The response itself has passed into
history and is not altered. By emphasizing a change in the
organism, Thorndike’s principle made it possible to include the
effects of action among the causes of future action without using
concepts like purpose, intention, expectancy, or utility. Up to that
time, the only demonstrable causes of behavior had been
antecedent stimuli. The range of the eliciting stimulus was later to
be extended by Pavlovian conditioning, and the concept could be
broadened to include the releasers of the ethologists, but only a
small part of behavior can be predicted or controlled simply by
identifying or manipulating stimuli. The Law of Effect added an

important new class of variables of which behavior could be shown
to be a function.
Thorndike’s solution was probably suggested by Darwin’s
treatment of phylogenic purpose. Before Darwin, the purpose of a
well-developed eye might have been said to be to permit the
organism to see better. The principle of natural selection moved
“seeing better” from the future into the past: organisms with welldeveloped eyes were descended from those which had been able
to see better and had therefore produced more descendants.
Thorndike was closer to the principle of natural selection than the
above statement of his law suggests. He did not need to say that a
response which had been followed by a certain kind of
consequence was more likely to occur again but simply that it was
not less likely. It eventually held the ﬁeld because responses which
failed to have such effects tended, like less favored species, to
disappear.
Thorndike was concerned with how animals solved problems,
rather than with the concept of purpose, and his Law of Effect did
not end purposive formulations. The devices used for the study of
behavior during the next quarter of a century continued to
emphasize an intentional relation between behavior and its
consequences. The relation was represented spatially. In mazes,
runways, and open ﬁelds, for example, organisms ran toward their
goals. In discrimination apparatuses they chose the door which led
to food. They escaped from the dangerous side of shuttle-boxes or
pulled away from sources of dangerous stimulation. They drew
objects toward them with rakes or strings. The experimenter could
see the purpose of an action in the spatial relation of the organism
and the objects toward which it was moving or from which it was
withdrawing. It was even asserted that the organism itself should
see a purposive relationship in some such form in order to behave
effectively. Köhler, for example, criticized Thorndike on just this
score (84).
The spatial representation of purpose, expectancy, or intention
obscured one of the most important features of the relation
emphasized by Thorndike. The process he identiﬁed remained
unexplored for 30 years and during that time was confused with
rote habit formation and with various formulations of Pavlovian
conditioning. In the late 1920’s, however, the consequences of
behavior began to be studied with devices of another sort. Pavlov’s
technique for the study of conditioned reﬂexes contributed to their

development, even though Pavlov himself was not primarily
concerned with consequences as such. In his basic studies,
indeed, it might be said that the organism did not receive food for
doing anything; the salivation elicited by the conditioned stimulus
did not produce the food which followed. The experimental design,
however, called for food to be introduced at a given moment
automatically. Once the procedure was familiar, it was no great
step to arrange devices in which a response “produced” food in a
similar fashion. In 1927 Ivanov-Smolensky (75), one of Pavlov’s
associates, reported an experimental arrangement, close to
Thorndike’s, in which a child squeezed a rubber bulb to obtain
chocolate. In the same year D. K. Adams (1) reported a similar
arrangement with cats. In 1928, as we have seen, Miller and
Konorski (101) presented food to a hungry dog when its leg was
ﬂexed, reﬂexly or passively, and eventually when ﬂexion occurred
alone. In 1932 Grindley (58) reported on similar work with guinea
pigs. The essential features are seen when a rat operates a food
dispenser by pressing a lever. None of these responses is a
natural way of achieving its consequence. The behavior is
nevertheless altered. The consequences of action change the
organism regardless of how or why they follow. The connection
need not be functional or organic—as, indeed, it was not in
Thorndike’s experiment.

Practical advantages
These early devices were not designed to eliminate spatial
representations of purpose, but they all did so—and with farreaching consequences. Some of these were practical. The
experimenter could choose a response which was conveniently
recorded; or one which the organism could execute rapidly and
without fatigue for long periods of time; or one which minimized the
peculiarities of a species and thus furthered a comparison between
species with respect to properties not primarily related to the
topography of behavior. In particular, it was possible to choose a
response which was relatively free of extraneous variables and not
likely to be confused with responses elicited or evoked by them.
When a shuttle-box, for example, is used to study the effect of the
postponement or termination of a shock, the behavior affected
(running or jumping from one side to the other) is topographically
similar to unconditioned responses to shock, such as startle or

jumping into the air, and to more elaborate patterns of escape from
a space in which shocks have been received. It may also resemble
responses of both these sorts conditioned in the Pavlovian manner
and elicited by the warning stimuli. The inevitable confusion can be
avoided by making the postponement or termination of a shock
contingent on an arbitrary response, such as pressing a lever in
the Sidman arrangement, which is not otherwise related to the
variables at issue. A response which is only temporally related to its
consequences could also be conveniently studied with automatic
equipment.
Another practical result was terminological. The term “operant”
distinguishes between reﬂexes and responses which operate
directly on the environment (128). The alternative term,
instrumental, suggests the use of tools. To say that a rat “uses a
lever to obtain food” has purposive overtones, and where nothing
can be identified as an instrument, it is often said that the organism
“uses a response” to gain an effect. For example, verbal behavior
is interpreted as “the use of words,” although the implication that
words exist as things apart from behavior unnecessarily
complicates an analysis (141). Another change was from reward to
reinforcement. Reward suggests compensation for behaving in a
given way, often in some sort of contractual arrangement.
Reinforcement in its etymological sense designates simply the
strengthening of a response. It refers to similar events in Pavlovian
conditioning, where reward is inappropriate. These changes in
terminology have not automatically eliminated purposive
expressions (such as “The pigeon was reinforced for pecking the
key”), but a given instance can usually be rephrased. Comparable
teleological expressions are common in other sciences, as
Bernatowicz (15) has pointed out.

Rate of responding as a datum
A more important result of studying an arbitrary connection
between a response and its consequences, together with the
simpliﬁed procedures which then become available, has been to
emphasize rate of responding as a property of behavior. Rate is
one of those aspects of a subject matter which do not attract
attention for their own sake and which undergo intensive study
only when their usefulness as a dependent variable has been
discovered. Other sciences have passed through comparable

stages. The elements and compounds studied by the chemist have
fascinating characters—they exist in many colors, textures, and
states of aggregation and undergo surprising transmutations when
heated, dissolved, combined, and so on. These are the
characteristics which naturally ﬁrst attract attention. They were, for
example, the principal concern of the alchemists. In contrast, the
mere weight of a given quantity of a substance is of little interest in
its own right. Yet it was only when the weights of substances
entering into reactions were found to obey certain laws that
chemistry moved into its modern phase. Combining weight became
important because of what could be done with it. Rate of
responding has emerged as a basic datum in a science of behavior
for similar reasons. It is less dramatic than traits of character, but in
the long run a more promising datum.
Changes in rate of responding are studied with methods which
also may seem strange to the student of the learning processes
said to take place in some inner system. The latter can usually be
investigated only with “statistics.” If learning is never accurately
represented in one performance, performances must be averaged.
If statements about the inner system cannot be directly conﬁrmed,
hypotheses must be set up and theorems deduced and tested. If
some properties of the inner system are meaningful only with
respect to larger sets of facts, a procedure such as factor analysis
may be needed. It is not surprising that research on this pattern
has come to be judged by the sophistication of its statistical and
logical techniques. Conﬁdence in an experiment is proportional to
the number of subjects studied, an experiment is good only if
properly “designed,” and results are signiﬁcant only at a level
determined by special tests.
Much of this is lacking in the experimental analysis of behavior,
where experiments are usually performed on a few subjects, curves
representing behavioral processes are seldom averaged, the
behavior attributed to complex mental activity is analyzed directly,
and so on. The simpler procedure is possible because rate of
responding and changes in rate can be directly observed,
especially when represented in cumulative records. The effect is
similar to increasing the resolving power of a microscope; a new
subject matter is suddenly open to direct inspection. Statistical
methods are unnecessary. When an organism is showing a stable
or slowly changing performance, it is for most purposes idle to stop
to evaluate the conﬁdence with which the next stage can be

predicted. When a variable is changed and the effect on
performance observed, it is for most purposes idle to prove
statistically that a change has indeed occurred. (It is sometimes
said in such a case that the organism is “used as its own control,”
but the expression, borrowed from a basically different
methodology, is potentially troublesome.) Much can be done in the
study of behavior with methods of observation no more
sophisticated than those available, say, to Faraday, with his
magnets, wires, and cells. Eventually the investigator may move on
to peripheral areas where indirect methods become necessary, but
until then he must forego the prestige which attaches to traditional
statistical methods.
Some traditional uses must also be questioned. Learning curves
remain inadequate no matter how smooth they are made by
averaging cases. Statistical techniques may eliminate noise, but
the dimensions are still faulty. A curve which enables us to predict
the performance of another organism does not therefore represent
a basic process. Moreover, curves which report changes in
variables having satisfactory dimensions can often not be
averaged. The idiosyncrasies in a cumulative record do not
necessarily show caprice on the part of the organism or faulty
technique on the part of the experimenter. The complex system we
call an organism has an elaborate and largely unknown history
which endows it with a certain individuality. No two organisms
embark upon an experiment in precisely the same condition nor are
they affected in the same way by the contingencies in an
experimental space. (It is characteristic of most contingencies that
they are not precisely controlled, and in any case they are effective
only in combination with the behavior which the organism brings to
the experiment.) Statistical techniques cannot eliminate this kind of
individuality; they can only obscure and falsify it. An averaged
curve seldom correctly represents any of the cases contributing to it
(123).
An analysis which recognizes the individuality of the organism is
particularly valuable when contact is made with other disciplines
such as neurology, psychopharmacology, and psychotherapy,
where idiosyncratic sets of variables must also be considered. The
rigor of the analysis is not necessarily threatened. Operant
methods make their own use of Grand Numbers; instead of
studying a thousand rats for one hour each, or a hundred rats for

ten hours each, the investigator is likely to study one rat for a
thousand hours. The procedure is not only appropriate to an
enterprise which recognizes individuality, it is at least equally
efﬁcient in its use of equipment and of the investigator’s time and
energy. The ultimate test of uniformity or reproducibility is not to be
found in the methods used but in the degree of control achieved, a
test which the experimental analysis of behavior usually passes
easily.
When effects on behavior can be immediately observed, it is
most efﬁcient to explore relevant variables by manipulating them in
an improvised and rapidly changing design. Similar practices have
been responsible for the greater part of modern science. This is
not, however, the tenor of R. A. Fisher’s Design of Experiments,
which, as Lancelot Hogben (69) has said, gives the reader
… the impression that recourse to statistical methods is prerequisite to the design of
experiments of any sort whatever. In that event, the whole creation of experimental scientists
from Gilbert and Hooke to J. J. Thomson and Morgan has been groaning and travailing in
fruitless pain together; and the biologist of today has nothing to learn from well-tried methods
which have led to the spectacular advances of the several branches of experimental science
during the last three centuries.

Statistics, like logic and scientiﬁc methodology in general,
emphasizes the verbal behavior of the scientist: how reliable are
his measures, how signiﬁcant are the differences he reports, how
conﬁdent can we be that what he says is true? His nonverbal
behavior is much less easily codiﬁed and analyzed. In such
considerations what the scientist does takes second place to what
h e says. Yet the a priori manipulation of variables, guided by
directly observed effects, is superior to the a posteriori analysis of
co-variation in many ways. It leads more rapidly to prediction and
control and to practical recombinations of variables in the study of
complex cases. Eventually, of course, the experimenter must
behave verbally. He must describe what he has done and what he
has seen, and he must conduct his research with this obligation in
mind. But a compulsive preoccupation with validity or signiﬁcance
may be inimical to other, equally important obligations.
A nonstatistical strategy may also be recommended for its effect
on the behavior of the investigator, who is perhaps as strongly
reinforced during a successful experiment as the organism he
studies. The contingencies to which he is submitted largely

determine whether he will continue in similar work. Statistical
techniques often inject a destructive delay between the conduct of
an experiment and the discovery of the signiﬁcance of the data—a
fatal violation of a fundamental principle of reinforcement. The
exceptional zeal which has often been noted in students of
operant behavior is possibly attributable to the immediacy of their
results.

The circumvention of an operant analysis
By accepting changes in rate of responding as basic behavioral
processes and by emphasizing environmental variables which can
be manipulated with the help of automatic equipment, research on
operant behavior has been greatly simpliﬁed. But it has not been
made easy. Technical advances have been offset by the demand
for increasing rigor, by the problems which arise in studying one
organism at a time, and by the attack on more and more complex
arrangements of interrelated operants. Behavior—human or
otherwise—remains an extremely difﬁcult subject matter. It is not
surprising that practices which seem to circumvent or simplify an
operant analysis are common. In particular, verbal communication
between subject and experimenter is widely used in lieu of the
explicit arrangement of contingencies of reinforcement and the
objective recording of behavior. The practice goes back to the
study of mental life and is still favored by psychologists who
formulate their subject matter in mental terms, but it survives as if it
were a labor-saving device in many essentially behavioristic
formulations.
The manipulation of independent variables appears to be
circumvented when, instead of exposing an organism to a set of
contingencies, the contingencies are simply described in
“instructions.” Instead of shaping a response, the subject is told to
respond in a given way. A history of reinforcement or punishment is
replaced by a promise or threat: “Movement of the lever will
sometimes operate a coin dispenser” or “… deliver a shock to your
leg.” A schedule of positive or negative reinforcement is described
rather than imposed: “Every response to the right lever postpones
the shock but increases the number of responses to the left lever
required to operate the coin dispenser.” Instead of bringing the
behavior under the control of a stimulus, the subject is told to
behave as if a discrimination had been established: “Start when

the light goes on, stop when it goes off.” Thus instructed, the
subject is asked either to behave appropriately or to describe
behavior he might emit under such circumstances. The scope of
the verbal substitute can be estimated by considering how a
nonverbal organism, human or otherwise, could be similarly
“instructed.”
Descriptions of contingencies are, of course, often effective.
Hypothetical consequences are commonly used for practical
purposes (“Will you do the job if I pay you $50?” or “How would you
feel about going if I told you that X would be there?”), and the
subject is worth studying. Verbal instructions may be defended
when the resulting behavior is not the primary object of interest; for
example, the experimenter may show a subject how to operate a
piece of equipment rather than shape his behavior through
reinforcement so long as he is not concerned with the acquisition
of the response but with what happens to it later. Verbal
communication is not, however, a substitute for the arrangement
and manipulation of variables.
There is no reason why a description of contingencies of
reinforcement should have the same effect as exposure to the
contingencies. A subject can seldom accurately describe the way in
which he has actually been reinforced. Even when he has been
trained to identify a few simple contingencies, he cannot then
describe a new contingency, particularly when it is complex. We
can scarcely expect him, therefore, to react appropriately to
descriptions by the experimenter. Moreover, the verbal
contingencies between subject and experimenter must be taken
into account. Instructions must in some way promise or threaten
consequences not germane to the experiment if the subject is to
follow them.
The other major task in an operant analysis may seem to be
circumvented when, instead of recording behavior so that rate or
probability of response can be observed or inferred, the
experimenter simply asks the subject to evaluate his tendency to
respond or to express his preference for responding in one way
rather than another. The subject may do so by describing his
“intentions” or “plans” or by reporting “expectations” regarding the
consequences of an action. Such behavior may be worth
investigating, but it is not a substitute for the behavior observed in
an operant analysis. Only in the simplest cases can a person
correctly describe his ongoing behavior. The difﬁculty is not

linguistic; the subject could be given an operandum and permitted
to “model” the behavior—for example, to generate a cumulative
record. It is highly unlikely that he would construct a curve closely
resembling the curve he would generate if actually exposed to a
speciﬁc set of contingencies, or even a curve he had already
generated when so exposed. Changes in rate of responding are
never easy to describe. They necessarily take place in time, and
even a second observer cannot “see” them until they have been
reduced to graphic form. The subject’s own behavior presents
other difﬁculties. If we ask him to say simply whether he will be
more or less likely to respond, or will respond more or less rapidly,
we have increased his chances of being right only by asking him to
say less. Any report, no matter how speciﬁc, is subject to the verbal
contingencies which induce a person to describe his behavior and
possibly to similar contingencies elsewhere which may classify his
behavior, for example, as right or wrong.
Verbal substitutes for arranged or observed variables may be
used at different points in an investigation: contingencies may be
described to the subject and his behavior then actually observed;
he may be exposed to a set of contingencies and then asked to
evaluate the nature or probability of his responses; and so on.
Similar practices are used to evaluate the reinforcing or aversive
properties of a given event or procedure, to predict the outcome of
several variables operating at once, and so on, and are subject to
the same criticism.
To those interested primarily in mental processes, verbal
communication may not be an attempted circumvention or shortcut.
On the contrary, an operant analysis may seem to be the long way
around. The position is sometimes defended by insisting that the
student of behavior always begins with an interest in mental life—
possibly his own—and designs his experiments essentially to test
hypotheses about it. Whatever the case may once have been,
operant research has long since passed the point at which the
experimenter can be guided by considering possible effects of
variables on himself. The introspective vocabulary used in
circumventing an experimental analysis is hopelessly inadequate
for the kinds of facts currently under investigation. If one ﬁeld is to
borrow from the other, the debt will henceforth almost certainly be
in the other direction; from the study of the behavior of other
organisms, the experimenter is most likely to come to understand

himself. In some theories of knowledge, introspective observations
may be regarded as primary data, but in an analysis of behavior
they are a form of theorizing which is not required or necessarily
helpful.

Analyses of contingencies of reinforcement
The consequences of action and their effects on behavior also
enter into theories of probability, decision-making, conﬂict, and
games. The classical urn containing a given proportion of black
and white balls, like other sample spaces, may be analyzed without
reference to behavior, but it would be of little interest if the
consequences of drawing either a black or white ball were not in
some way reinforcing. (There has always been a close connection
between probability theory and gambling, where every play is
punished to the extent of its cost and some plays are also
reinforced.) Probability theory also often takes into account the fact
that this reinforcement will occur on an intermittent schedule and
that as a consequence the drawer will experience a given
subjective or felt probability, or exhibit a given probability of drawing
again.
The probability that the drawer will draw again is usually assumed
to be related to the probability function of the sample space. A
relation is implied when it is said that a subject who has sufﬁcient
knowledge about a given system, possibly inferred from his
experience with it, can behave “rationally.” A relation is also implied
when it is argued that irrational behavior requires explanation. For
example, the fact that intermittent reinforcement raises the
probability of responding above the value generated when all
responses are reinforced has recently occasioned surprise. Any
such relation is, of course, an empirical fact, to be determined
experimentally. Standard operant equipment can be used to set up
contingencies of reinforcement which have the effect of classical
sample spaces. A schedule could, if necessary, be programmed by
actually drawing balls from an urn. An organism can then be
exposed to the schedule and the effect on its behavior observed.
In such a procedure the status of the probability function of the
sample space (the schedule of reinforcement arranged by the
programming equipment) is clear. The probability that the organism
will respond at a given time is inferred from its rate. The relation
between these two probabilities is complicated by the fact that rate

of responding under a given schedule depends, as we have seen,
on previous exposure to the schedule. When introduced into an
experimental space for the ﬁrst time, an organism may be said to
show a certain “prior probability” of responding—the so-called
operant level. A ﬁrst response is or is not reinforced, and the rate
rises or falls accordingly. This brief history contributes to what is
now a different situation. When the organism responds again and
is again possibly reinforced, the situation changes still more
substantially. A given set of contingencies yields a performance
which combines with the programming equipment to generate other
contingencies which in turn generate other performances, and so
on.
Many of these interactions between behavior and programming
equipment have been carefully studied. Under a variable interval
schedule of reinforcement, for example, the organism often
responds at a nearly constant rate for long periods of time. All
reinforcements therefore occur when it is responding at that rate,
although this condition is not speciﬁed by the equipment. The rate
becomes a discriminative and, in turn, a reinforcing stimulus, which
opposes any change to a different rate—such as would otherwise
be induced by, say, a psychopharmacological agent. As another
example, when only the ﬁrst response after the passage of a ﬁxed
interval of time is reinforced, the organism comes to exhibit a fairly
stable performance in which the number of responses emitted
during an interval approaches constancy. The organism is then
being reinforced not only after a constant interval of time but after
emitting a constant number of responses. The latter condition,
which is not speciﬁed by the equipment, is characteristic of a ﬁxed
ratio schedule, and it generates a much higher rate of responding.
As rapid responding appears, the stability of the ﬁxed interval
performance is destroyed, the number of responses per
reinforcement is no longer constant, and a stable interval
performance is restored as another cycle begins (46).
A third example is closer to probability theory. A schedule in
which a response is reinforced upon completion of an appreciable
ﬁxed or variable number of responses must often be reached
through a program, as we have seen. The number must ﬁrst be
small, but the schedule favors reinforcement when the organism is
responding at a high rate, and it is soon possible to “stretch” the
requirement. When a hungry rat is reinforced with food for running
in a wheel, the required distance can be increased until more

energy is consumed than is available in the food received (129).
The behavior of the gambler, which almost always shows a similar
“negative utility,” is the result of the same kind of stretching. The
variable ratio schedules inherent in gambling systems maintain
behavior only after a history of reinforcement in which behavior has
combined with the programming equipment to generate certain
powerful terminal contingencies.
In summary, a scheduling system has no effect until an organism
is exposed to it, and then it no longer fully determines the
contingencies. Still other interactions between equipment and
performance arise when a second response is introduced in order
to study choice or decision-making. Suppose, for example, that a
subject may press either of two keys, A and B, on which
reinforcements are independently scheduled. The performance on
either key can be accounted for only by examining the combined
action of equipment and earlier performances on both keys. For
example, if reinforcements are programmed on interval schedules,
responding to A after B is more likely to be reinforced than
responding to B after B, since the equipment may have set up a
reinforcement on A while a response was being made to B. The
behavior of changing from A to B or from B to A may be favored to
the point at which the performance becomes a simple alternation
(134). This yields the same rate on both keys, even though the
schedules may be substantially different. The interaction may be
corrected with a change-over delay in which, for example, a
response to B is not reinforced if a response to A has been made
during the preceding second, or in which the ﬁrst response to
either key after changing over is never reinforced (65). The
contingencies on the two levers are nevertheless still subject to the
other interactions mentioned previously. (By manipulating the
change-over delay and other characteristics of the schedules, it
may be possible to generate rates of responding on the two keys
which would be predicted from some hypothesis of rationality or
utility, but it would be a mistake to regard these as optimal
conditions and possibly to stop the search when they have been
found.)
Interactions between performance and programming system are
still more complex if the performance changes the system, as in the
so-called adjusting and interlocking schedules (46). Many examples
are to be found in the theory of games and conﬂict, where the

behavior of one organism alters the contingencies affecting
another, and vice versa. The rules of any game can be
represented by programming equipment which is subject to
modiﬁcation by the performances of the players, but the actual
contingencies of reinforcement are still more complex, for they
include conditions not speciﬁed by the equipment but generated
by the earlier performances of all parties.
That there is a limitation inherent in such analyses is suggested
by the fact that mathematical inquiries into probability, decisionmaking, conﬂict, and games conﬁne themselves almost exclusively
to ratio schedules. The contingencies deﬁned in sample spaces
and rules practically always specify reinforcement as a function of a
number of responses, a restraint traceable perhaps to practical
issues involving winning, losing, and ultimate utility. Yet the
interactions between equipment and performance are the same
when reinforcement is scheduled by clocks or speedometers rather
than by counters, and the same processes are involved, as an
experimental analysis has abundantly shown.
The properties of sample spaces, like the various conditions
under which choices are made, games played, or conﬂicts
resolved, may be analyzed without taking behavior into account or,
at most, by assuming selected performances. Those interested
primarily in such an analysis are likely to approach behavior, if at
all, by setting up hypotheses. The research which follows has the
nature of hypothesis testing and is wasteful if the data collected
lose their value when a hypothesis has been disproved or
abandoned for any reason. An experimental analysis of the
behavior generated by the contingencies in sample spaces may be
conducted without guessing at the results.

“Rule-governed behavior” 1
Analyses of contingencies of reinforcement are related to behavior
in another way when they are used as guides or rules. The
behavior of a person who has calculated his chances, compared
alternatives, or considered the consequences of a move is different
from, and usually more effective than, the behavior of one who has
merely been exposed to the unanalyzed contingencies. The
analysis functions as a discriminative stimulus. When such a
stimulus is perfectly correlated with reinforcement, the behavior
under its control is maximally reinforced. On an interval schedule

and in the absence of related stimuli, an organism emits
unreinforced or “wasted” responses, but if the apparatus presents
a conspicuous stimulus whenever a reinforcement becomes
available, the organism eventually responds only in the presence
of that stimulus and no responses are wasted. Clocks provide
stimuli of this sort in connection with events occurring on interval
schedules and are built and used for just that reason. Stimuli less
closely correlated with reinforcement yield lesser improvements in
efﬁciency. If a given setting on a clock cannot be sharply
discriminated, for example, some responses will be emitted prior to
“the time to respond” and some potentially effective responses may
be delayed, but performance is nevertheless improved. A
speedometer serves a similar function when reinforcement
depends on a given rate of responding.
Analyses of sample spaces serve the same function as imprecise
clocks and speedometers. Not every response under their control is
reinforced, but there is still a net gain. When a man learns to play
poker under the contingencies arranged by the cards and rules, his
sampling of the possible contingencies is necessarily limited, even
in prolonged play. He will play a more successful game, and after a
much shorter history, if he consults a table showing his chances of
success in making given plays. The contingencies in poker also
depend upon the behavior of other players, and prior stimuli
correlated with that behavior are therefore also useful. They are
particularly important in a game such as chess. Chess playing may
be shaped by the unanalyzed contingencies generated by the
rules of the game and by the performances of opponents, but a
player will play a better game, after a shorter history, if he can
consult standard gambits, defenses, end-games, and so on, which
show some of the likely consequences of given moves.
A stimulus commonly correlated with reinforcement and hence
useful in improving efficiency is the record left by previous behavior.
When a man ﬁnds his way from one place to another, he may
leave traces which prove useful when he goes that way again. He
wears a path which supplements the change taking place in his
behavior and may even be useful to others who have not gone
that way before. A path need not be constructed because it serves
this function, but the advantages gained may reinforce the explicit
leaving of traces. A trail is blazed, for example, precisely because it
is more easily followed. Comparable reinforcing advantages have
led men to construct pictures (maps) and verbal descriptions of

paths.
As we shall see (page 148), many proverbs and maxims are
crude descriptions of contingencies of social or nonsocial
reinforcement, and those who observe them come under a more
effective control of their environment. Rules of grammar and
spelling bring certain verbal contingencies of reinforcement more
forcefully into play. Society codiﬁes its ethical, legal, and religious
practices so that by following a code the individual may emit
behavior appropriate to social contingencies without having been
directly exposed to them. Scientiﬁc laws serve a similar function in
guiding the behavior of scientists.
A person could, of course, construct rules of grammar and
spelling, maxims for effective personal conduct, tables of
probabilities in the games he plays, and scientiﬁc laws for his own
use; but society usually analyzes the predictable contingencies for
him. He constructs comparable stimuli for himself when he makes
resolutions, announces intentions, states expectations, and
formulates plans. The stimuli thus generated control his behavior
most effectively when they are external, conspicuous, and durable
—when the resolution is posted or the plan actually drafted in
visible form—but they are also useful when recreated upon
occasion, as by recalling the resolution or reviewing the plan. The
gain from any such discriminative stimulus depends upon the
extent to which it correctly represents the contingencies which led
to its construction.
Discriminative stimuli which improve the efﬁciency of behavior
under given contingencies of reinforcement are important, but they
must not be confused with the contingencies themselves, nor their
effects with the effects of those contingencies. The behavior of the
poker player who evaluates his chances before making a given
play merely resembles that of the player whose behavior has been
shaped by prolonged exposure to the game. The behavior of one
who speaks correctly by applying the rules of a grammar merely
resembles the behavior of one who speaks correctly from long
experience in a verbal community. The results may be the same,
but the controlling variables are different and the behaviors are
therefore different. Nothing which could be called following a plan
or applying a rule is observed when behavior is a product of the
contingencies alone. To say that “the child who learns a language
has in some sense constructed the grammar for himself” (36) is as

misleading as to say that a dog which has learned to catch a ball
has in some sense constructed the relevant part of the science of
mechanics. Rules can be extracted from the reinforcing
contingencies in both cases, and once in existence they may be
used as guides. The direct effect of the contingencies is of a
different nature.
The distinction bears on two points already made. In the ﬁrst
place, the instructions used in circumventing an operant analysis
also have the status of prior stimuli associated with hypothetical or
real contingencies of reinforcement, but behavior in response to
them is not the behavior generated by exposure to the
contingencies themselves even when, on rare occasions, the two
are similar. Subjects may report that they “understand instructions”
and hence “know what to expect,” but it does not follow that
comparable reportable states of understanding or knowledge are
generated by the contingencies themselves. In the second place—
to return at last to the point with which this chapter began—when a
man explicitly states his purpose in acting in a given way he may,
indeed, be constructing a “contemporary surrogate of future
consequences” which will affect subsequent behavior, possibly in
useful ways. It does not follow, however, that the behavior
generated by the consequences in the absence of any statement
of purpose is under the control of any comparable prior stimulus,
such as a felt purpose or intention.

Note 5.1

Purpose

The contingencies of reinforcement which deﬁne operant behavior
are widespread if not ubiquitous. Those who are sensitive to this
fact are sometimes embarrassed by the frequency with which they
see reinforcement everywhere, as Marxists see class struggle or
Freudians the Oedipus relation. Yet the fact is that reinforcement is
extraordinarily important. That is why it is reassuring to recall that its
place was once taken by the concept of purpose; no one is likely
to object to a search for purpose in every human act. The
difference is that we are now in a position to search effectively.
The words intend, propose (as a synonym for purpose as a
ve rb ), expect, believe, think, and know often seem to be
concerned with the future. They are all used idiomatically with an
inﬁnitive or dependent clause describing action, as in I intend to
go, I propose to go, or I think that I shall go. Such expressions

suggest that the speaker will go, but they do not identify the past
consequences which account for the probability that he will do so.
We do not use terms of this sort idiomatically when the person
cannot describe the variables of which his behavior is a function.
We may be satisﬁed that a man goes to a meeting primarily
because refreshments have been served at similar meetings in the
past, but we concede that he did so “unconsciously.” He may not
have been surprised when refreshments were served, but we do
not say that he went because he expected or believed that this
would happen. A person may state his purpose or intention, tell us
what he expects to do or get, and describe his beliefs, thoughts,
and knowledge. (He cannot do this, of course, when he has not
been “conscious” of the causal connections.) The contingencies
are nevertheless effective when a person cannot describe them.
We may ask him to describe them after the fact (“Why did you do
that?”), and he may then examine his own behavior and discover
his purpose or belief for the ﬁrst time. He was not aware of his
purpose when he acted, but he can state it afterward. A more
explicit statement may be made prior to the act: a man may
announce his purpose, state his intention, or describe the
thoughts, beliefs, or knowledge upon which an action will be
based. These cannot be reports of action because the action has
not yet occurred; they appear instead to describe precursors. Once
such a statement has been made, it may well determine action as
a sort of self-constructed rule. It is then a true precursor having an
obvious effect on subsequent behavior. When it is covert, it may be
hard to spot; but it is still a form of behavior or a product of
behavior rather than a mental precursor.
An experimental analysis permits us to relate behavior to a
history of reinforcement and to other variables such as deprivation.
We identify the variables and the relations among them. We may
do this with respect to our own behavior provided we have been
taught to do so by a given verbal community. Verbal communities
which encourage introspection and self-observation are particularly
likely to have this effect. Once we have observed variables
affecting our own behavior, we may respond to them in other ways.
In an extreme case we may analyze a set of contingencies of
reinforcement, possibly a set to which we ourselves have not yet
been exposed, and from the analysis derive rules enjoining or
directing behavior similar to that which would be shaped by the

contingencies. Subsequently we may follow these rules, possibly
remaining untouched by the contingencies as such. There are then
two extremes: (1) behavior shaped only by contingencies of
reinforcement, in which case we respond “unconsciously,” and (2)
rule-governed behavior in which the contingencies from which the
rules are derived may not have affected us directly. Between these
extremes lie a wide range of degrees of “awareness.” We can
describe the probability of action by reporting that we expect to go,
think we shall go, and so on. We may describe relevant variables
by saying that we are going with the intention of getting food or
knowing that we shall get food. We need a great deal of
information in order to give an accurate translation of a single
instance of verbal behavior in which one of these crucial terms
appears. This is unfortunate, particularly for those who put
purposes, thoughts, and knowledge high on their lists. In no
translation do we need to use the substantive forms to refer to
things.
There is an emotional element in expectancy or expectation
which does not seem to be present in purpose or belief.
Expectancy usually suggests positively reinforcing consequences.
It may be idiomatic to say that we expect disaster, but we are more
likely to say that we fear it. Most of the less respectable forms of
expectancy, however, are conﬁned to aversive consequences. A
premonition is a prior warning, and one has forebodings only with
respect to coming ills. Anxiety, in the sense of fear of an impending
event, is more than expectancy, and so is anticipation, which
seems to be as close as the English language comes to an
antonym of anxiety. Anxiety involves emotional responses to a
conditioned aversive stimulus, anticipation to a conditioned positive
reinforcer.

Note 5.2

The definition of an operant

It is not enough to say that an operant is deﬁned by its
consequences. The consequences must have had the effect of
making a condition of deprivation or aversive stimulation a current
variable. The problem of causation in human behavior is said to be
exemplified as follows (167):
“Is my act of ﬂipping on the light switch the same act as my act of alerting the prowler, if in
fact by ﬂipping on the switch and illuminating the room, I do alert the prowler?” Although the

question sounds as relevant as the medieval puzzler about how many angels can dance on a
pinhead … it has highly practical implications in ﬁxing intention and responsibility, and
theoretical ones in helping to solve the age-old puzzler of free will v. determinism.

The topography of the response is described accurately enough
as “ﬂipping the switch.” If the appearance of light is reinforcing—
perhaps because in a lighted room behavior which has been
reinforced in other ways is more likely to occur and behavior which
has had aversive consequences less likely—the topography and
the consequences deﬁne an operant. Alerting a prowler is clearly a
different consequence which is contingent on the same
topography of response and which enters into the deﬁnition of a
different operant. The probability of ﬂipping a switch is affected by
both consequences. The question is relevant to “ﬁxing intention
and responsibility” as well as to “free will v. determinism” just
because it concerns the effectiveness of contingencies of
reinforcement. Flipping a switch has no meaning, purpose, or
intention; but ﬂipping a switch “to light the room” or “to alert a
prowler” has, because these expressions refer to independent
variables of which the probability of ﬂipping a switch may be a
function.
An effort is sometimes made to describe behavior without
specifying topography in detail. It has been suggested, for
example, that “rather than … ﬁnd the motor equivalent of …
responses,—the phenomena [may be] dealt with in functional
terms and consequently ordered under two general behavior
tendencies, namely, proximity seeking and proximity avoidance”
(120). It is true that much behavior has the effect of bringing one
closer to a person or object (E. B. Holt called such behavior
“adient”) or farther away (“abient”), but in describing behavior in this
way we are specifying some of its consequences rather than its
topography. What is described is therefore different from a “motor
equivalent” not only in being more general but in introducing other
data. “Proximity seeking” is not an operant, or any useful
subdivision of behavior, unless all instances vary together under
the control of common variables, and this is quite unlikely. Peterson
has shown that imprinting in the young duckling is largely a matter
of being reinforced by increasing proximity to the mother or
imprinted object; increased proximity is reinforcing even when,
thanks to a mechanical contrivance, the duckling achieves it by
walking away from its mother. Adience and abience are spatial

representations of purpose—of relations to positive and negative
reinforcers; they are not topographical properties of behavior.
Several related issues have been raised by Charles Taylor (156)
in criticizing the proposal that terms like “aggression,” “guilt,” and so
on, should be done away with and that we should speak instead of
the “explicit shaping of behavioral repertoires.”
At one level the proposal seems totally confused. For the point of Freudian theory is that we
can identify the “patterns of behavior” (that is, actions) in terms of “aggression” and “guilt”:
Some act is an act of aggression, the point of some other act is to alleviate guilt for
aggression, and so on. It is only qua characterized in this way that these actions can be linked
to their antecedents in the person’s development, or perhaps predicted from this early
development. To discover the “latent meaning” of, say, a neurotic ritual is not to indulge in a
ﬂight of fancy which could be inhibited without damage to the theory; it is to identify the action
by the description under which it is linked to its antecedent conditions, by the part it plays in
the psychic economy. Thus it seems nonsense to speak of the “patterns of behavior” as
against guilt, aggression, etc. But on another level, [the] proposal is not only confused but
totally destructive of the theory. For we might interpret “patterns of behavior” as “patterns of
movement” (as against action)…. But then nothing remains. For it is only as actions, and as
actions with a certain meaning that these patterns can be linked in the theory with their
antecedents. What is important is not that water is passing over my hands, but that I am
washing my hands, that I am trying to cleanse them. The notions of action, desire, and so on
are essential to Freud’s theory: They form part of his “data language.” To try to “translate” the
theory into the data language considered adequate by those who do not share the same
fundamental assumptions is to make nonsense of it. There is no such thing as Freud without
psychology.

Such a purge “utterly destroys the theory” (it is designed to do
so), but it does not destroy any of the valid relationships Freud
discovered. Patterns of behavior are not simply patterns of
movement. As we shall see again in Chapter 8, no behavior is
aggressive because of its topography. A person who is at the
moment aggressive is one who, among other characteristics, (1)
shows a heightened probability of behaving verbally or non-verbally
in such a way that someone is damaged (together with a lowered
probability of acting in such a way that he is positively reinforced)
and (2) is reinforced by such consequences. We may regard this as
a state (or, better, pattern) of behavior or as an emotional state,
comparable to a state of deprivation. Freud argued, for example,
that events in a person’s early life may be responsible for the fact
that he now tends to act in ways which damage others and is

reinforced by such damage. The fact that the current object of
aggression only roughly resembles the original is in accord with
established principles of generalization. If Freud’s theory is simply
the assertion that such relations may or do exist, then it had better
be called a hypothesis or a statement of fact. The objectionable
part of the theory is the mental apparatus which Freud invented to
account for the relations and the causal status he ascribed to its
parts.
A person who is likely to damage someone and to be reinforced
by damaging him will probably “feel” something—the condition
described as “being likely to act aggressively” and quite possibly
autonomic responses generated by the same contingencies. He
may respond to such stimulation and say “I feel aggressive,” even
though he has not acted in a conspicuous way; but what he feels
in any case are collateral effects, not, as Freud asserted, causes.
The pattern or state generated by an independent variable may be
effective although “unconscious”; only when “conscious” is it felt as
aggression.
Allowing water to pass over one’s hands can perhaps be
adequately described as topography, but “washing one’s hands” is
an “operant” deﬁned by the fact that, when one has behaved this
way in the past, one’s hands have become clean—a condition
which has become reinforcing because, say, it has minimized a
threat of criticism or contagion. Behavior of precisely the same
topography would be part of another operant if the reinforcement
had consisted of simple stimulation (e.g., “tickling”) of the hands or
the evocation of imitative behavior in a child whom one is teaching
to wash his hands.
To be observed, a response must affect the environment—it
must have an effect upon an observer or upon an instrument which
in turn can affect an observer. This is as true of the contraction of a
small group of muscle ﬁbers as of pressing a lever or pacing a
ﬁgure 8. If we can see a response, we can make reinforcement
contingent upon it; if we are to make a reinforcer contingent upon
a response, we must be able to see it or at least its effects.
Most of the facts about operant conditioning—extinction,
discrimination, stimulus generalization, and the effects of schedules
of reinforcement—could have been discovered with a “preparation”
similar to those used in reﬂex physiology in which the contraction of
a limb or a single muscle operated a switch. Important facts would,
however, then have been missed. Reinforcement strengthens

responses which differ in topography from the response reinforced.
When we reinforce pressing a lever, for example, or saying Hello,
responses differing quite widely in topography grow more probable.
This is a characteristic of behavior which has strong survival value
(see Chapter 7), since it would be very hard for an organism to
acquire an effective repertoire if reinforcement strengthened only
identical responses.
We must not, however, assume the complete interchangeability
of members of a response class (an operant) deﬁned with respect
to a change produced in the environment.

Note 5.3

Class versus instance

An operant is a class, of which a response is an instance or
member. The usage is seldom respected. Strictly speaking, it is
always instances which are counted in determining frequency, and
from that frequency the probability of a response inferred. The
probability is frequently taken, however, as the measure of the
strength of an operant. Strength of response has no meaning
except as a property of an instance, such as its force or speed. It is
always a response upon which a given reinforcement is contingent,
but it is contingent upon properties which deﬁne membership in an
operant. Thus a set of contingencies defines an operant.
Contingencies cannot always be detected upon a given
occasion. Although a response is reinforced, we cannot be sure
what property satisﬁed the contingencies and hence deﬁnes the
operant. The role of stimuli in deﬁning contingencies is perhaps
even more important. A response is reinforced in the presence of a
given stimulus, but we cannot tell from a single instance what
property of the stimulus is part of the contingencies. The “referent”
of an abstract response is not identiﬁable upon any one occasion.
Only by surveying many instances can we identify the properties of
stimuli and responses which enter into the contingencies. This is
not quite the traditional question of whether we can know
particulars or universals, but it is interesting that the practice of
imparting a universal meaning to the response itself as an
alternative to surveying a large number of instances is close to the
Platonic practice of letting ideas stand for universals.
A similar problem arose in the early history of evolution. As Mayr
has shown (100), nineteenth century biologists were troubled by

the distinction between species and individuals. Both Agassiz and
Darwin, for quite different reasons, denied the existence of species
as such. For Agassiz a species was an idea or thought. The
relation between a species as a class and contingencies of survival
(see Chapter 7) resembles the relation between an operant as a
class and contingencies of reinforcement. The deﬁning properties
of both species and operants are practical; they are the
characteristics (of individual organisms or responses) which are
important in their respective contingencies.
Curiously enough, phylogenic responses are a sort of bridge
between these two areas. An instinct is a class of which instinctive
responses are instances. We observe only the instances, but we
construct the instinct. Only instances have the effects upon which
contingencies of survival operate.

6

An operant analysis of problem solving

The behavior observed when a man solves a problem is
distinguished by the fact that it changes another part of his
behavior and is reinforced and strengthened when it does so.1 Two
stages are easily identiﬁed in a typical problem. A hungry man
faces a problem if he cannot emit any response previously
reinforced with food; to solve it he must change either himself or
the situation until a response occurs. The behavior which brings
about the change is properly called problem solving and the
response it promotes a solution. A question for which there is at
the moment no answer is a problem. It may be solved, for example,
by performing a calculation, by consulting a reference work, or by
acting in any way which helps in recalling a previously learned
answer.
Since there is probably no behavioral process which is not
relevant to the solving of some problem, an exhaustive analysis of
techniques would coincide with an analysis of behavior as a whole.
This chapter is conﬁned to the status and function of the terms
appearing in an operant formulation.

Contingencies of reinforcement
When a response occurs and is reinforced, the probability that it will
occur again in the presence of similar stimuli is increased. The
process no longer presents any great problem for either organism
or investigator, but problems arise when contingencies are
complex. For example, there may be no response available which
satisﬁes a given set of contingencies; or competing responses may
be evoked—among them emotional changes which weaken the
very response upon which reinforcement is contingent or destroy
the power of a reinforcer; or the contingencies may be satisﬁed
only by a sequence or chain of responses, early members of which
are too remote from the terminal reinforcer to be strongly affected
by it until conditioned reinforcers have been set up.
In Thorndike’s experiment the probability of turning the latch was
at ﬁrst quite low. The box evoked conditioned and unconditioned
escape behavior, much of it incompatible with turning the latch,
and emotional responses which probably made the food less

reinforcing when it was eventually reached. The terminal
performance which satisﬁed the contingencies was a chain of
responses: orienting toward and approaching the latch, touching
the latch and turning it, orienting toward and passing through the
opened door, and approaching and eating the food. Some links in
this chain may have been reinforced by the food and others by
escape from the box, but some could be reinforced only after other
reinforcers had been conditioned. For these and other reasons the
box presented a problem—for both the cat and Thorndike.
Thorndike thought he solved his problem by saying that the
successful cat used a process of trial-and-error learning. The
expression is unfortunate. “Try” implies that a response has already
been affected by relevant consequences. A cat is “trying to
escape” if it engages in behavior which either has been selected in
the evolution of the species because it has brought escape from
dangerous situations or has been reinforced by escape from
aversive stimulation elsewhere during the life of the cat. The term
“error” does not describe behavior, it passes judgment on it. The
curves for trial-and-error learning plotted by Thorndike and many
others do not represent any useful property of behavior—certainly
not a single process called problem solving. The changes which
contribute to such a curve include the adaptation and extinction of
emotional responses, the conditioning of reinforcers, and the
extinction of unreinforced responses. Any contribution made by an
increase in the probability of the reinforced response is hopelessly
obscured.
Even in Thorndike’s rather crude apparatus it should be possible
to isolate the change resulting from reinforcement. We could begin
by adapting the cat to the box until emotional responses were no
longer important. By opening the door repeatedly (while making
sure that this event was not consistently contingent on any
response), we could convert the stimuli generated by the door into
conditioned reinforcers which we could then use to shape the
behavior of moving into a position from which the latch would be
likely to be turned. We could then reinforce a single instance of
turning the latch and would almost certainly observe an immediate
increase in the probability that the latch would be turned again.
This kind of simpliﬁcation is common in the experimental analysis
of behavior. It eliminates the process of trial and error and, as we
have noted, disposes of the data which are plotted in learning
curves. It leaves no problem and, of course, no opportunity to

solve a problem. Clearly it is not the thing to do if we are interested
in studying or in teaching problem solving. It is because
programmed instruction eliminates much problem solving that some
objections have been raised against it. The programmer solves the
learner’s problems for him. How does he do so? What must he not
do if he is either to study or to teach problem solving?

Constructing discriminative stimuli
Consider a simple example not unlike Thorndike’s puzzle box. You
have been asked to pick up a friend’s suitcase from an airport
baggage claim. You have never seen the suitcase or heard it
described; you have only a ticket with a number for which a match
is to be found among the numbers on a collection of suitcases. To
simplify the problem let us say that you ﬁnd yourself alone before a
large rotary display. A hundred suitcases move past you in a great
ring. They are moving too fast to be inspected in order. You are
committed to selecting suitcases essentially at random, checking
one number at a time. How are you to find the suitcase?
You may, of course, simply keep sampling. You will almost
certainly check the same suitcase more than once, but eventually
the matching ticket will turn up. If the suitcases are not identical,
however, some kind of learning will take place; you will begin to
recognize and avoid cases which do not bear the matching
number. A very unusual case may be tried only once; others may
be checked two or three times, but responses to them will
eventually be extinguished and the suitcase eliminated from the
set.
A much more effective strategy is to mark each case as it is
checked—say, with a piece of chalk. No bag is then inspected
twice, and the number of bags remaining to be examined is
reduced as rapidly as possible. Simple as it seems, this method of
solving the problem has some remarkable features. Simply
checking cases at random until the right one is found is of no
interest as a behavioral process; the number of checks required to
solve the problem is not a dimension of behavior. It is true that
behavioral processes are involved in learning not to check cases
which have already been marked because they bear nonmatching
numbers, but the time required to ﬁnd the right case throws no
useful light on them. Mathematicians, showing perhaps too much
conﬁdence in psychologists, often take this kind of learning

seriously and construct theoretical learning curves and design
learning machines in which probabilities of responding change in
terms of consequences, but the changes actually occurring in the
processes of extinction and discrimination can be studied much
more directly. (In a recent article H. D. Bloch (20) argues that a
learning curve which is “fairly typical of those found for biological
organisms in general” can be traced to an “embarrassingly simple”
mechanism the explanation of which becomes “utterly transparent.”
T h e euphoria mathematica is scarcely justiﬁed. Bloch is not
analyzing a behavioral process at all.)
It is the use of the chalk which introduces something new.
Marking each suitcase as it is checked is a kind of precurrent
behavior which furthers the reinforcement of subsequent behavior
—by reducing the number of samplings needed to ﬁnd the right
suitcase. Technically speaking, it is constructing a discriminative
stimulus—an S Δ. The effect on the behavior which follows is the
only reinforcement to which making such a mark can be attributed.
And the effect must not be neglected, for it distinguishes the chalk
marks from marks left by accident. One could “learn” the Hampton
Court maze after a fresh fall of snow simply by learning not to enter
any path showing footprints leaving it;2 it is only when footprints
have been found useful and, hence, when any behavior which
makes them conspicuous is automatically reinforced that we reach
the present case. A well-worn path over difﬁcult terrain or through a
forest is a series of discriminative stimuli and hence a series of
reinforcers. It reinforces the act of blazing or otherwise marking the
trail. Marking a right path is, technically speaking, constructing an
S D.
It is much easier to construct useful discriminative stimuli in verbal
form. Easily recalled and capable of being executed anywhere, a
verbal response is an especially useful kind of chalk mark. Many
simple “statements of fact” express relations between stimuli and
the reinforcing consequences of responses made to them. In the
expression Red apples are sweet for example, the word red
identiﬁes a property of a discriminative stimulus and sweet a
property of a correlated reinforcer; red apples are “marked” as
sweet. The verbal response makes it easier to learn to discriminate
between sweet and sour apples, to retain the discrimination over a
period of time, and, especially when recorded, to respond
appropriately when the original discrimination may have been

forgotten. (Whether one must describe or otherwise identify
contingent properties in order to form a discrimination is not the
issue. Lower organisms discriminate without responding verbally to
essential properties, and it is unlikely that man gave up the ability
to do so. He simply discovered the additional value of constructing
descriptive stimuli which improve his chances of success.)

Transmission of constructed stimuli
A constructed external mark has another important advantage; it
affects other people. A stranger can follow a well-worn path almost
as well as the man who laid it down. Another person could take
over the search for the suitcase using our marks—either after we
had told him to ignore cases marked with chalk (that is, after the
chalk mark had been made an effective discriminative stimulus
through verbal instruction) or after he had learned to ignore marked
cases—in a process which would still be quicker than learning to
ignore some cases when all have remained unmarked. Two people
could also search for the same case using each other’s marks.
Something of the sort happens when, for example, scientists are
said to be “working on a problem.”
The stimuli which a man constructs in solving problems can be
helpful to other people precisely because the variables
manipulated in self-management are those which control the
behavior of men in general. In constructing external stimuli to
supplement or replace private changes in his behavior, a man
automatically prepares for the transmission of what he has learned.
His verbal constructions become public property as his private
discriminations could not. What he says in describing his own
successful behavior (I held the base ﬁrmly in my left hand and
turned the top to the right) can be changed into a useful instruction
(Hold the base ﬁrmly in your left hand and turn the top to the right).
The same variables are being manipulated and with some of the
same effects on behavior.
The role of a public product of problem solving in the
accumulation and transmission of folk wisdom is exempliﬁed by a
formula once used by blacksmiths’ apprentices. Proper operation of
the bellows of a forge was presumably ﬁrst conditioned by the
effects on the bed of coals. Best results followed full strokes, from
wide open to tightly closed, the opening stroke being swift and the
closing stroke slow and steady. Such behavior is described in the

verse:
Up high, down low,
Up quick, down slow—
And that’s the way to blow (119).
The ﬁrst two lines describe behavior, the third is essentially a social
reinforcer. A blacksmith may have composed the poem for his own
use in facilitating effective behavior or in discussing effective
behavior with other blacksmiths. By occasionally reciting the poem,
possibly in phase with the action, he could strengthen important
characteristics of his own behavior. By recalling it upon a remote
occasion, he could reinstate an effective performance. The poem
must also have proved useful in teaching an apprentice to operate
the bellows. It could even generate appropriate behavior in an
apprentice who does not see the effect on the fire.
Much of the folk wisdom of a culture serves a similar function.
Maxims and proverbs describe or imply behavior and its reinforcing
consequences. The reinforcement is positive in A penny saved is a
penny earned, which may be paraphrased Not-spending, like
earning, is reinforced with pennies. It is negative in Procrastination
is the thief of time, where a connection is described between
putting things off at the moment and being unpleasantly busy later.
Many maxims describe social contingencies. The reinforcing
practices of a community are often inconsistent or episodic, but
contingencies which remain relatively unchanged for a period of
time may be described in useful ways. It is better to give than to
receive speciﬁes two forms of behavior and states that the net
reinforcement of one is greater than that of the other. (The Golden
Rule is a curious instance. No speciﬁc response is mentioned, but
a kind of consequence is described in terms of its effect on those
who use the rule. In the negative form one is enjoined not to
behave in a given way if the consequence would be aversive to
oneself. In the positive form one is enjoined to behave in a given
way if the consequences would be reinforcing to oneself. The rule
may have been discovered by someone particularly sensitive to his
effects on others, but once stated it should have proved generally
useful.) Maxims usually describe rather subtle contingencies of
reinforcement, which must have been discovered very slowly. The
maxims should have been all the more valuable in making such
contingencies effective on others.

The formal laws of governmental and religious institutions also
specify contingencies of reinforcement involving the occasions
upon which behavior occurs, the behavior itself, and the reinforcing
consequences. The contingencies were almost certainly in effect
long before they were formulated. Anyone who took another’s
property, for example, would often be treated aversively. Eventually
men learned to behave more effectively under such contingencies
by formulating them. A public formulation must have had additional
advantages; with its help authorities could maintain the
contingencies more consistently and members of the group could
behave more effectively with respect to them—possibly without
direct exposure. The codiﬁcation of legal practices, justly
recognized as a great advance in the history of civilization, is an
extraordinary example of the construction of S D’s.
A well-known set of reinforcing contingencies is a language. For
thousands of years men spoke without beneﬁt of codiﬁed rules.
Some sequences of words were effective, others were less so or
not at all. The discovery of grammar was the discovery of the fairly
stable properties of the contingencies maintained by a community.
The discovery may have been made ﬁrst in a kind of personal
problem solving, but a description of the contingencies in the form
of rules of grammar permitted men to speak correctly by applying
rules rather than through long exposure to the contingencies. The
same rules became helpful in instruction and in maintaining verbal
behavior in conformity with the usages of the community.
Scientiﬁc laws also specify or imply responses and their
consequences. They are not, of course, obeyed by nature but by
men who deal effectively with nature. The formula s=½gt2 does not
govern the behavior of falling bodies, it governs those who
correctly predict the position of falling bodies at given times.
As a culture produces maxims, laws, grammar, and science, its
members ﬁnd it easier to behave effectively without direct or
prolonged contact with the contingencies of reinforcement thus
formulated. (We are concerned here only with stable contingencies.
When contingencies change and the rules do not, rules may be
troublesome rather than helpful.) The culture solves problems for its
members, and it does so by transmitting discriminative stimuli
already constructed to evoke solutions. The importance of the
process does not, of course, explain problem solving. How do men
arrive at the formulas which thus prove helpful to themselves and

others? How do they learn to behave appropriately under
contingencies of reinforcement for which they have not been
prepared, especially contingencies which are so speciﬁc and
ephemeral that no general preparation is possible?

Problem-solving behavior
The question “Who is that just behind you?” poses a problem
which, if the person is known by name, is solved simply by turning
around and looking. Turning and looking are precurrent responses
which generate a discriminative stimulus required in order to emit a
particular name. One may also generate helpful stimuli by looking
more closely at a stimulus which is not yet effectively evoking a
response even though it is already in the visual ﬁeld, and beyond
“looking more closely” lie certain problem-solving activities in which
a vague or complex stimulus is tentatively described or
characterized. A stimulus is more likely to be seen in a given way
when it has been described, and may then even be “seen in its
absence” (see page 253). A crude description may contribute to a
more exact one, and a ﬁnal characterization which supports a quite
unambiguous response brings problem solving to an end. The
result is useful to others if, in public form, it leads them to see the
same thing in the same way. The reactions of others which are
reinforcing to those who describe vague situations may shape their
descriptions, often exerting a control no less powerful than the
situations themselves.
Behavior of this sort is often observed as a kind of running
comment on contingencies of reinforcement to which one is being
exposed. A child learns to describe both the world to which he is
reacting and the consequences of his reactions. Situations in
which he cannot do this become so aversive that he escapes from
them by asking for words. Descriptions of his own behavior are
especially important. The community asks him: What did you do?
What are you doing? What are you going to do? And why? and his
answers describe his behavior and relate it to effective variables.
The answers eventually prove valuable to the child himself. The
expression I grabbed him because he was going to fall refers to a
response (grabbing) and a property of the occasion (he was going
to fall) and implies a reinforcement (his falling would have been
aversive to the speaker or others). It is particularly helpful to
describe behavior which fails to satisfy contingencies, as in I let go

too soon or I struck too hard. Even fragmentary descriptions of
contingencies speed the acquisition of effective terminal behavior,
help to maintain the behavior over a period of time, and reinstate it
when forgotten. Moreover, they generate similar behavior in others
not subjected to the contingencies they specify. As a culture
evolves, it encourages running comment of this sort and thus
prepares its members to solve problems most effectively. Cultures
which divert attention from behavior to mental events said to be
responsible for the behavior are notably less helpful.
It is possible to construct similar discriminative stimuli without
engaging in the behavior. A piece of equipment used in the study
of operant behavior is a convenient example of a reinforcing
system. One may arrive at behavior appropriate to the
contingencies it maintains through prolonged responding under
them and in doing so may formulate maxims or rules. But the
equipment itself may also be examined. One could look behind the
interface between organism and apparatus and set down
directions for behaving appropriately with respect to the system
there discovered. The environment is such a reinforcing system,
and parts of it are often examined for such purposes. By analyzing
sample spaces and the rules of games, for example, we compose
instructions which evoke behavior roughly resembling the behavior
which would be generated by prolonged responding under the
contingencies they maintain. Science is in large part a direct
analysis of the reinforcing systems found in nature; it is concerned
with facilitating the behavior which is reinforced by them.
(When prescriptions for action derived from an analysis of a
reinforcing system differ from prescriptions derived from exposure to
the contingencies maintained by the system, the former generally
prevail. There are many reasons for this. A system is usually easier
to observe than a history of reinforcement. The behavior
summarized in a running comment may not be the terminal
behavior which most adequately satisﬁes a given set of
contingencies. A terminal performance may be marked by
permanent though unnecessary features resulting from
coincidental contingencies encountered en route. And so on.)
Contingencies are sometimes studied by constructing a model of
a reinforcing environment. One may react to the model in simpler
ways (for example, verbally) and acquire appropriate behavior more
quickly. If rules derived from exposure to the model are to prove
helpful in the environment, however, the contingencies must be the

same, and a model is helpful therefore only if the reinforcing
system has already been described. It is helpful simply in facilitating
exposure to the contingencies and in studying the resulting
changes in behavior.
Many instances of problem-solving behavior would be called
induction. The term applies whether the stimuli which evoke
behavior appropriate to a set of contingencies are derived from an
exposure to the contingencies or from direct inspection of the
reinforcing system. In this sense induction is not the deriving of a
general rule from speciﬁc instances but the construction of a rule
which generates behavior appropriate to a set of contingencies.
Rule and contingency are different kinds of things; they are not
general and specific statements of the same thing.
Deduction is still another way of constructing discriminative
stimuli. Maxims, rules, and laws are physical objects, and they can
be manipulated to produce other maxims, rules, and laws. Secondorder rules for manipulating ﬁrst-order rules are derived from
empirical discoveries of the success of certain practices or from an
examination of the contingency-maintaining systems which the ﬁrstorder rules describe. In much of probability theory ﬁrst-order rules
are derived from a study of reinforcing systems. Second-order rules
are discovered inductively when they are found to produce
effective new ﬁrst-order rules or deductively (possible tautologically)
from an analysis of ﬁrst-order rules or of the contingencies they
describe.
Many rules which help in solving the problem of solving problems
are familiar. “Ask yourself ‘What is the unknown?”’ is a useful bit of
advice which leads not to a solution but to a modiﬁed statement to
which a ﬁrst-order rule may then be applied. Reducing the
statement of a problem to symbols does not solve the problem but,
by eliminating possibly irrelevant responses, it may make ﬁrst-order
problem solving more effective. Second-order, “heuristic” rules are
often thought to specify more creative or less mechanical activities
than the rules in ﬁrst-order (possibly algorithmic) problem solving,
but once a heuristic rule has been formulated, it can be followed as
“mechanically” as any first-order rule (152).
Solving a problem is a behavioral event. The various kinds of
activities which further the appearance of a solution are all forms of
behavior. The course followed in moving toward a solution does
not, however, necessarily reﬂect an important behavioral process.

Just as there are almost as many “learning curves” as there are
things to be learned, so there are almost as many “problem-solving
curves” as there are problems. Logic, mathematics, and science
are disciplines which are concerned with ways of solving problems,
and the histories of these ﬁelds record ways in which particular
problems have been solved. Fascinating as this may be, it is not a
prime source of data about behavior. Strategies and instances in
which strategies have actually been used have the same status
whether a problem is solved by an individual, a group, or a
machine. Just as we do not turn to the way in which a machine
solves a problem to discover the electrical, mechanical, optical, or
chemical principles on which it is constructed, so we should not turn
to the way in which a man or a group solves a problem for useful
data in studying individual behavior, communication, or coordinated
action. This does not mean that we may not study individual,
group, or machine behavior in order to discover better ways of
solving problems or to reveal the limits of the kind of strategies
which may be employed or the kinds of problems which may be
solved.

Contingency-shaped versus rule-governed behavior
The response which satisﬁes a complex set of contingencies, and
thus solves the problem, may come about as the result of direct
shaping by the contingencies (possibly with the help of deliberate
or accidental programming) or it may be evoked by contingencyrelated stimuli constructed either by the problem solver himself or
by others. The difference between rule-following and contingencyshaped behavior is obvious when instances are pretty clearly only
one or the other. The behavior of a baseball outﬁelder catching a
ﬂy ball bears certain resemblances to the behavior of the
commander of a ship taking part in the recovery of a reentering
satellite. Both move about on a surface in a direction and with a
speed designed to bring them, if possible, under a falling object at
the moment it reaches the surface. Both respond to recent
stimulation from the position, direction, and speed of the object,
and they both take into account effects of gravity and friction. The
behavior of the baseball player, however, has been almost entirely
shaped by contingencies of reinforcement, whereas the
commander is simply obeying rules derived from the available
information and from analogous situations. As more and more

satellites are caught, it is conceivable that an experienced
commander, under the inﬂuence of successful or unsuccessful
catches, might dispense with or depart from some of the rules thus
derived. At the moment, however, the necessary history of
reinforcement is lacking, and the two cases are quite different.
Possibly because discriminative stimuli (as exempliﬁed by
maxims, rules, and laws) are usually more easily observed than the
contingencies they specify, responses under their control tend to
be overemphasized at the expense of responses shaped by
contingencies. One resulting mistake is to suppose that behavior is
always under the control of prior stimuli. Learning is deﬁned as
“ﬁnding, storing, and using again correct rules” (37), and the simple
shaping of behavior by contingencies which have never been
formulated is neglected. When the brain is described as an “organ
for the manipulation of symbols,” its role in mediating changes in
behavior resulting from reinforcement is not taken into account.
Once the pattern has been established, it is easy to argue for
other kinds of prior controlling entities such as expectancies,
cognitive maps, intentions, and plans. We refer to contingencyshaped behavior alone when we say that an organism behaves in
a given way with a given probability because the behavior has
been followed by a given kind of consequence in the past. We
refer to behavior under the control of prior contingency-specifying
stimuli when we say that an organism behaves in a given way
because it expects a similar consequence to follow in the future.
The “expectancy” is a gratuitous and dangerous assumption if
nothing more than a history of reinforcement has been observed
(see page 106). Any actual formulation of the relation between a
response and its consequences (perhaps simply the observation,
“Whenever I respond in this way such and such an event follows”)
may, of course, function as a prior controlling stimulus.
The contingency-specifying stimuli constructed in the course of
solving problems never have quite the same effects as the
contingencies they specify. One difference is motivational.
Contingencies not only shape behavior, they alter its probability;
but contingency-specifying stimuli, as such, do not do so. Though
the topography of a response is controlled by a maxim, rule, law, or
statement of intention, the probability of its occurrence remains
undetermined. After all, why should a man obey a law, follow a
plan, or carry out an intention? It is not enough to say that men are
so constituted that they automatically follow rules—as nature is

said, mistakenly, to obey the laws of nature. A rule is simply an
object in the environment. Why should it be important? This is the
sort of question which always plagues the dualist. Descartes could
not explain how a thought could move the pineal gland and thus
affect the material body; Adrian acknowledged that he could not
say how a nerve impulse caused a thought (2). How does a rule
govern behavior?
As a discriminative stimulus, a rule is effective as part of a set of
contingencies of reinforcement. A complete speciﬁcation must
include the reinforcement which has shaped the topography of a
response and brought it under the control of the stimulus. The
reinforcements contingent on prior stimulation from maxims, rules,
or laws are sometimes the same as those which directly shape
behavior. When this is the case, the maxim, rule, or law is a form of
advice (141). Go west, young man is an example of advice when
the behavior it speciﬁes will be reinforced by certain consequences
which do not result from action taken by the adviser. We tend to
follow advice because previous behavior in response to similar
verbal stimuli has been reinforced. Go west, young man is a
command when some consequences of the speciﬁed action are
arranged by the commander—say, the aversive consequences
arranged by an ofﬁcial charged with relocating the inhabitants of a
region. When maxims, rules, and laws are advice, the governed
behavior is reinforced by consequences which might have shaped
the same behavior directly in the absence of the maxims, rules,
and laws. When they are commands, they are effective only
because special reinforcements have been made contingent upon
them. Governments, for example, do not trust to the natural
advantages of obeying the law to ensure obedience. Grammatical
rules are often followed not so much because the behavior is then
particularly effective as because social punishments are contingent
on ungrammatical behavior.
Rule-governed behavior is obviously unmotivated in this sense
when rules are obeyed by machines. A machine can be
constructed to move a bellows up high, down low, up quick, and
down slow, remaining forever under the control of the specifying
rules. Only the designer and builder are affected by the resulting
condition of the ﬁre. The same distinction holds when machines
follow more complex rules. A computer, like a mechanical bellows,
does only what it was constructed and instructed to do. Mortimer

Taube (155) and Ulrich Neisser (105) are among those who have
recently argued that the thinking of a computer is less than human,
and it is signiﬁcant that they have emphasized the lack of
“purpose.” But to speak of the purpose of an act is, as we saw in
Chapter 5, simply to refer to its characteristic consequences. A
statement of purpose may function as a contingency-specifying
discriminative stimulus. Computers merely follow rules. So do men
at times—for example, the blacksmith’s apprentice who never sees
the ﬁre or the algorithmic problem solver who simply does what he
has been taught or told to do. The motivating conditions (for
machines and men alike) are irrelevant to the problem being
solved.
Rules are particularly likely to be deﬁcient in the sovereignty
needed for successful government when they are derived from
statistical analyses of contingencies. It is unlikely that anyone will
ever stop smoking simply because of the aversive stimulation
associated with lung cancer, at least not in time to make any
difference, and it is therefore unlikely that giving up smoking will be
shaped by these consequences. The actual contingencies have
little effect on behavior under the control of contingency-specifying
facts or rules. A formal statement of contingencies ( Cigarette
smoking causes lung cancer) needs the support of carefully
engineered aversive stimuli involving sanctions quite possibly
unrelated to the consequences of smoking. For example, smoking
may be classiﬁed as shameful, illegal, or sinful and punished by
appropriate agencies.
Some contingencies cannot be accurately described. The old
family doctor was often a skillful diagnostician because of
contingencies to which he had been exposed over many years, but
he could not always describe these contingencies or construct
rules which evoked comparable behavior in younger men. Some of
the experiences of the mystic are ineffable in the sense that all
three terms in the contingencies governing his behavior (the
behavior itself, the conditions under which it occurs, and its
consequences) escape adequate specification. Emotional behavior
is particularly hard to bring under the control of rules. As Pascal put
it, “the heart has its reasons which reason will never know.”
Nonverbal skills are usually much harder to describe than verbal.
Verbal behavior can be reported in a unique way by modelling it in
direct quotation (141). Nonverbal behavior is modelled so that it
can be imitated but not as precisely or as exhaustively.

Rule-governed behavior is in any case never exactly like the
behavior shaped by contingencies. The golf player whose swing
has been shaped by its effect on the ball is easily distinguished
from the player who is primarily imitating a coach, even though it is
much more difﬁcult to distinguish between a man who is making an
original observation and one who is saying something because he
has been told to say it; but when topographies of response are
very similar, different controlling variables are necessarily involved,
and the behavior will have different properties. When operant
experiments with human subjects are simpliﬁed by instructing the
subjects in the operation of the equipment (see page 114 ), the
resulting behavior may resemble that which follows exposure to the
contingencies and may be studied in its stead for certain purposes,
but the controlling variables are different, and the behaviors will not
necessarily change in the same way in response to other variables
—for example, under the influence of a drug.
The difference between rule-following and contingency-shaped
behavior may be observed as one passes from one to the other in
“discovering the truth” of a rule. A man may have avoided
postponing necessary work for years either because he has been
taught that Procrastination is the thief of time and therefore avoids
procrastination as he avoids thieves, or because he dutifully obeys
the injunction Do not put off until tomorrow what you can do today.
Eventually his behavior may come under the direct inﬂuence of the
relevant contingencies—in doing something today he actually
avoids the aversive consequences of having it to do tomorrow.
Though his behavior may not be noticeably different (he continues
to perform necessary work as soon as possible) he will now behave
for different reasons, which must be taken into account. When at
some future time he says Procrastination is the thief of time, his
response has at least two sources of strength; he is reciting a
memorized maxim and emitting a contingency-specifying statement
of fact.
The eventual occurrence of a planned event works a similar
change. Plans for a symposium are drawn up and followed.
Eventually, almost incidentally it may seem, the symposium is held
and certain natural consequences follow. The nature of the
enterprise as an instance of human behavior has changed; in
particular the probability that similar behavior will occur in the future
has been altered. In the same way those half-formed expectancies

called “premonitions” suddenly become important when the
premonitored events occur. A similar change comes about when an
actor, starting with memorized words and prescribed actions, comes
under the inﬂuence of simulated or real reactions by other
members of the cast, under the shaping effect of which he begins
to “live” the role.
The classical distinction between rational and irrational or intuitive
behavior is of the same sort. The “reasons” which govern the
behavior of the rational man describe relations between the
occasions on which he behaves, his behavior, and its
consequences. In general we admire the intuitive man, with his
contingency-shaped behavior, rather than the mere follower of
rules. For example, we admire the man who is “naturally” good
rather than the merely law-abiding, the intuitive mathematician
rather than the mere calculator. Plato discusses the difference in
the Charmides, but he confuses matters by supposing that what
we admire is speed. It is true that contingency-shaped behavior is
instantly available, whereas it takes time to consult rules and
examine reasons; but irrational behavior is more likely to be wrong
and therefore we have reason to admire the deliberate and rational
man. We ask the intuitive mathematician to behave like one who
calculates—to construct a proof which will guide others to the same
conclusion even though the intuitive mathematician himself did not
need it. We insist, with Freud, that the reasons men give in
explaining their actions should be accurate accounts of the
contingencies of reinforcement which were responsible for their
behavior.

Other kinds of problems
To deﬁne a problem, etymologically, as something explicitly put
forth for solution (or, more technically, as a speciﬁc set of
contingencies of reinforcement for which a response of appropriate
topography is to be found) is to exclude instances in which the
same precurrent activities serve a useful function although the
topography of a response is already known. The distinction
between contingency-shaped and rule-following behavior is still
required. Sometimes the problem is not what to do but whether to
do it. Problem-solving behavior is designed to strengthen or
weaken an already identiﬁed response. Conﬂicting positive and
negative consequences, of either an intellectual or ethical nature,

are especially likely to raise problems of this sort—for example,
when a strongly reinforced response has deferred aversive
consequences or when immediate aversive consequences conﬂict
with deferred reinforcers.
A relevant problem-solving practice is to emit the questionable
response in tentative form—for example, as a hypothesis. Making a
hypothesis differs from asserting a fact in that the evidence is
scantier and punishment for being wrong more likely to follow. The
emitted response is nevertheless useful, particularly if recorded,
because it may enter into other problem-solving activities. For
rather different purposes one acts verbally before acting in other
ways by making a resolution. It is easier to resolve than to act; but
the resolution makes the action more likely to take place. (A
promise speciﬁes a response and creates social contingencies
which strengthen it, and contingencies of social origin are invoked
when one “promises oneself” to do something in making a
resolution.) A statement of policy is also a description of action to
be taken. (Resolutions and statements of policy are often made
because action itself is at the moment impossible, but they are
relevant here only when the action they strengthen or weaken is
not under physical constraint.) A joint secret statement of policy is a
conspiracy; it describes cooperative action to be undertaken by a
group.
Like the rules and plans appropriate to problems in which the
topography of the solution is not known, hypotheses, statements
of policy, and so on, are not to be inferred in every instance of
behavior. People act without making resolutions or forming policies.
Different people or groups of people (for example, “capitalists” in
socialist theory) act in the same way under similar contingencies of
reinforcement, even cooperatively, without entering into a
conspiracy. The conclusion to which a scientist comes at the end of
an experiment was not necessarily in existence as a hypothesis
before or during the experiment.
Sometimes the problem is to arrive at a less than maximal
probability appropriate to intermittent reinforcement. A calculated
probability, derived either by sampling a schedule of reinforcement
or by directly inspecting the system maintaining such a schedule,
controls an appropriate strength of response. But, again, a person
is not always acting under the control of such a calculation or of
any prior “felt” probability or sense of confidence, trust, or belief.
Sometimes the problem is to decide which of two or more

responses to emit, the topographies of all alternatives being
known. The concepts of choice and decision making have been
overemphasized in psychological and economic theory. It is difﬁcult
to evaluate the probability that a single response will be made, but
when two or more mutually exclusive responses are possible, the
one actually emitted seems at least to be stronger than the others.
For this reason early psychological research emphasized situations
and devices in which only relative strength was observed (the rat
turned right rather than left or jumped toward a circle rather than a
square). Efforts to assess the separate probabilities of the
competing responses were thus discouraged. Single responses
were treated only as decisions between acting and not acting,
within the time limits set by a “trial.” The notion of relative strength is
then practically meaningless, and “choose” simply means
“respond.” The problem of whether to act in one way or another
differs from the problem of whether or not to act only because one
of the aversive consequences of acting in one way is a loss of the
opportunity to act in another. The same problem-solving activities
are relevant. A decision announced before acting is essentially a
resolution or statement of policy. The mere emission of one
response rather than another, however, does not mean that a
decision has been formulated.
The notion of a problem as something set for solution is even
less appropriate when neither the topography of the behavior
strengthened by precurrent activity nor its consequences are
known until the behavior occurs. Artists, composers, and writers, for
example, engage in various activities which further their production
of art, music, and literature. (Sometimes they are required to
produce works meeting quite narrow speciﬁcations, and their
behaviors then exemplify explicit problem solving, but this is by no
means always the case.) The artist or composer explores a medium
or a theme and comes up with an unforeseen composition having
unforeseen effects. A writer explores a subject matter or a style
and comes up with a poem or a book which could not have been
described or its effects predicted in advance. In this process of
“discovering what one has to say,” relevant precurrent behavior
cannot be derived from any speciﬁcation of the behavior to follow
or of the contingencies which the behavior will satisfy. The
precurrent behavior nevertheless functions by virtue of the
processes involved in solving statable problems. For example,

crude sketches and tentative statements supply stimuli leading to
other sketches and statements, moving toward a ﬁnal solution.
Here again, it is a mistake to assume that the artist, composer, or
writer is necessarily realizing some prior conception of the work he
produces. The conditions under which Renoir was reinforced as he
painted The Boating Party must have been as real as those under
which a mathematician or scientist is reinforced for solving a set
problem, but much less could have been said about them in
advance.
Problem solving is often said to produce knowledge. An operant
formulation permits us to distinguish between some of the things to
which this term has been applied.
What is knowledge, where is it, and what is it about? Michael
Polanyi (111, 112) and P. W. Bridgman ( 27, 28) have raised these
questions with respect to the apparent discrepancy between
scientiﬁc facts, laws, and theories (as published, for example, in
papers, texts, tables of constants, and encyclopedias) and the
personal knowledge of the scientist. Objective knowledge
transcends the individual; it is more stable and durable than private
experience, but it lacks color and personal involvement. The
presence or absence of “consciousness” can scarcely be the
important difference, for scientists are as “conscious” of laws as
they are of the things laws describe. Sensory contact with the
external world may be the beginning of knowledge, but contact is
not enough. It is not even enough for “conscious experience,”
since stimuli are only part of the contingencies of reinforcement
under which an organism distinguishes among the aspects and
properties of the environment in which it lives. Responses must be
made and reinforced before anything can be seen.
The world which establishes contingencies of reinforcement of
the sort studied in an operant analysis is presumably “what
knowledge is about.” A person comes to know that world and how
to behave in it in the sense that he acquires behavior which
satisﬁes the contingencies it maintains. Behavior which is
exclusively shaped by such contingencies is perhaps the closest
one can come to the “personal knowledge” of Polanyi and
Bridgman. It is the directed, “purposive” behavior of the blacksmith
who operates his bellows because of its effect on the fire.
But there is another kind of behavior which could be called
knowledge of the same things—the behavior controlled by
contingency-specifying stimuli. These stimuli are as objective as the

world they specify, and they are useful precisely because they
become and remain part of the external world. Behavior under their
control is the behavior of the apprentice who never sees the ﬁre
but acts as he instructs himself to act by reciting a poem. So far as
topography goes, it may resemble behavior directly shaped by
contingencies, but there remains an all important difference in
controlling variables. (To say that the behaviors have different
“meanings” is only another way of saying that they are controlled
by different variables [141].)
The distinction which Polanyi (112) in particular seems to be
trying to make is between contingency-shaped and rule-governed
behavior rather than between behaviors marked by the presence
or absence of “conscious experience.” Contingency-shaped
behavior depends for its strength upon “genuine” consequences. It
is likely to be nonverbal and thus to “come to grips with reality.” It is
a personal possession which dies with the possessor. The rules
which form the body of science are public. They survive the
scientist who constructed them as well as those who are guided by
them. The control they exert is primarily verbal, and the resulting
behavior may not vary in strength with consequences having
personal signiﬁcance. These are basic distinctions, and they
survive even when, as is usually the case, the scientist’s behavior
is due to both direct reinforcement and to the control exercised by
the contingency-specifying stimuli which compose facts, laws, and
theories.

Note 6.1

Why are rules formulated?

It is all very well to say that we extract rules from contingencies of
reinforcement, either when we have been exposed to them or have
had the chance to study the systems which arrange them, and that
we gain by doing so because we and others can then follow the
rules rather than submit to the possibly tedious process of having
behavior shaped by the contingencies. But “extracting a rule” is
complex behavior, and the natural reinforcement may be deferred.
Why and how does the behavior arise?
Some fragmentary rules emerge as natural consequences of
contingency-shaped behavior. Once a path has proved useful, it is
not too difﬁcult to explain any behavior which accentuates it. One
blazes a trail because one thus intensiﬁes discriminative stimuli

which as such are also reinforcing. Retracing one’s steps is
perhaps the simplest use of a path, and marking a path so that it
can be retraced is a common mythological theme. Footprints would
evidently not have been conspicuous in the minotaur’s labyrinth,
and Theseus therefore unwound Ariadne’s ball of thread as he
entered. Hansel and Gretel found themselves in trouble when their
trail of crumbs was eaten by birds.
A rather similar explanation holds for contingencies involving
time. To complete a journey before dark it may be necessary to
make an early start, and any stimulus correlated with time then
becomes important. The position of the sun will do. It can be made
more effective as a stimulus by measuring the altitude—say, in
handwidths from the horizon. Shadows cast by the sun are easier
to read, and a sundial is invented to cast them in standard ways.
Sandglasses and water clocks produce visual stimuli which change
with time at useful rates, but they are not modiﬁcations of natural
clocks and the precurrent behavior of invention must have been
more elaborate. The pendulum clock, of course, comes much later,
when stimuli correlated with time are in common use and the
mechanical arts well advanced. A clock is more useful when it can
be read, and numbers are therefore added to sundials,
sandglasses, and water clocks.
Paths and clocks, even when described verbally, are incomplete
rules, for other parts of the contingencies in which they appear are
not speciﬁed. Something closer to a complete rule may have
emerged in the form of responses which are reinforced when they
induce others to behave in given ways. A command or request
speciﬁes behavior and implies consequences, aversive in the
command, positively reinforcing in the request. A warning or a
piece of advice also speciﬁes behavior and at least implies
consequences. Contracts and bribes do the same. A student’s
assignment, a serf’s corvée, a worker’s quota, a soldier’s task, and
a citizen’s duty specify something to be done and the aversive
consequences which are avoided by doing it. Instructions and
directions are usually forms of advice and warning.
The injunctive character of rules of this sort is eventually
softened. The pure “mand” (141) may be replaced by a “tact”
describing conditions under which speciﬁc behavior on the part of
the listener will be reinforced. Give me a drink! yields to I am thirsty.
The craftsman begins by ordering his apprentice to behave in a
given way (or, as we have seen, by teaching him a poem to recite

in order to give himself orders); but he may later achieve the same
effect simply by describing the relation between what the
apprentice does and the consequences. A scientiﬁc law does not
enjoin anyone to behave in a given way; it simply describes the
contingencies under which certain kinds of behavior will have
certain kinds of consequences. Ethical, religious, and
governmental laws presumably begin as injunctions but, like
scientiﬁc laws, eventually merely describe contingencies, specifying
behavior and its (usually punitive) consequences. The difference
between a scientiﬁc and a governmental law is not that the one is
discovered and the other made, for both are discovered. A
government usually “makes a law” only when the culture is already
maintaining or disposed to maintain the contingencies the law
describes. The law is a description of prevailing ethical, religious, or
governmental practices. In codifying the practices of a culture in
praising and blaming, as well as in stating a scientiﬁc law, we are
describing contingencies of reinforcement. We cannot give anyone
credit for the consequences of his behavior until we have identiﬁed
the behavior, the consequences, and the relation between them,
nor can we blame anyone without a similar analysis. Both kinds of
contingencies exist and shape behavior before they are analyzed
or formulated in rules.
We might expect that a rule to guide one’s own behavior would
be formulated only rarely if at all. If one is already complying with a
set of contingencies, why is a rule needed? Nevertheless, the
scientist who examines a set of phenomena and formulates the law
which “governs” it may do so mainly because he himself can then
react more effevtively either now or later when the contingencyshaped behavior has weakened. Rules are stated more precisely
because of social contingencies designed to induce a person to
report what he is doing and why he is doing it. The verbal
community generates “awareness” (135, Chapters 17 and 18)
when it teaches an individual to describe his past and present
behavior and behavior he is likely to exhibit in the future and to
identify the variables of which all three are presumably functions.
The description which is thus generated is not yet a rule, but the
person may use the same terms to mand his own behavior (as a
form of self-control), to make resolutions, to formulate plans, to
state purposes, and thus to construct rules.

Note 6.2

The objectivity of rules

In contrasting contingency-shaped and rule-governed behavior we
must take account of four things:
(1) A system which establishes certain contingencies of
reinforcement, such as some part of the natural environment, a
piece of equipment used in operant research, or a verbal
community.
(2) The behavior which is shaped and maintained by these
contingencies or which satisﬁes them in the sense of being
reinforced under them.
(3) Rules derived from the contingencies, in the form of
injunctions or descriptions which specify occasions, responses, and
consequences.
(4) The behavior evoked by the rules.
The topography of (4) is probably never identical with that or (2)
because the rules in (3) are probably never complete speciﬁcations
of the contingencies in (1). The behaviors in (2) and (4) are also
usually under the control of different states of deprivation or
aversive stimulation.
Items (2) and (4) are instances of behavior and as such,
ephemeral and insubstantial. We observe an organism in the act of
behaving, but we study only the records which survive. Behavior is
also subjective in the sense that it is characteristic of a particular
person with a particular history. In contrast, (1) and (3) are objective
and durable. The reinforcing system in (1) exists prior to any effect
it may have upon an organism and it can be observed in the same
way by two or more people. The rules of (3) are more or less
permanent verbal stimuli. It is not surprising, therefore, that (2) and
(4) often take second place to (1) and (3). (1) is said to be what a
person acquires “knowledge about” and (3) is called “knowledge.”
Maps. In ﬁnding one’s way in a complex terrain, the relation
between the behavior and its reinforcing consequences can be
represented spatially, as we have seen, and “purposive” comes to
mean “goal directed.” A special kind of rule is then available—a
map. A city is an example of Item (1). It is a system of
contingencies of reinforcement: when a person proceeds along
certain streets and makes certain turns, he is reinforced by arriving
at a certain point. He learns to get about in the city when his
behavior (2) is shaped by these contingencies. This is one sense in

which, as we say, he “acquires knowledge of the city.” Whenever
the reinforcement associated with arriving at a given point is
relevant to a current state of deprivation, he behaves in ways
which lead to his arrival at that point. A map on which a route is
marked is an example of (3) and the behavior of following the map
is an example of (4). Getting about the city by following a map (4)
may resemble getting about the city as the effect of exposure to
the contingencies (2), but the topographies will probably be
different, quite apart from the collateral behavior of consulting the
map in the former case. Since the map (3) appears to be a kind of
objective “knowledge” of the city, it is easy to infer that (2) itself
involves a map—Tolman’s cognitive map, for example. It has been
pointed out (151) that almost all the ﬁgures which describe
apparatus in Tolman’s Purposive Behavior in Animals and Men are
maps. Terrain (1) is not only what is learned, it is what knowledge
(3) is about. Learning then seems to be the discovery of maps.1
But a map is plausible as a form of rule only when contingencies
can be represented spatially. It is true that other kinds of
psychological space have been hypothesized (for example, by Kurt
Lewin) in order to account for behavior which is not an example of
moving toward a goal or getting out of trouble, but the notion of a
map and the concept of space are then strained.
The extent to which behavior is contingency-shaped or rulegoverned is often a matter of convenience. When a trail is laid
quickly (as at Hampton Court after a fresh fall of snow), there is no
need to learn the maze at all; it is much more convenient simply to
learn to follow the trail. If the surface leaves no mark, the maze
must be learned as such. If the trail develops slowly, the maze may
be learned ﬁrst as if no path were available and the path which is
eventually laid down may never be used. If the maze is difﬁcult,
however—for example, if various points in it are very much alike—or
if it is easily forgotten, a slowly developing path may take over the
ultimate control. In that case one eventually “discovers the truth” in
a trail as one discovers the truth in a maxim.
It is the contingencies, not the rules, which exist before the rules
are formulated. Behavior which is shaped by the contingencies
does not show knowledge of the rules. One may speak
grammatically under the contingencies maintained by a verbal
community without “knowing the rules of grammar” in any other
sense, but once these contingencies have been discovered and

grammatical rules formulated, one may upon occasion speak
grammatically by applying rules.
Some psychologists call operant conditioning “probability
learning.” Sometimes the reference is to the probability that an
organism will respond in a given way (2) and sometimes to the
probability that a response will be reinforced under the prevailing
contingencies (1). “What is learned” is the latter; the organism is
said to come to “know what behavior will have what effects under
what circumstances.”
Concepts. The items on our list which seem objective also tend
to be emphasized when reinforcement is contingent upon the
presence of a stimulus which is a member of a set deﬁned by a
property. Such a set, which may be found in nature or explicitly
constructed, is an example of (1). Behavior is shaped by these
contingencies in such a way that stimuli possessing the property
evoke responses while other stimuli do not. The defining property is
named in a rule (3) extracted from the contingencies. (The rule
states that a response will be reinforced in the presence of a
stimulus with that property). Behavior (4) is evoked by stimuli
possessing the property, possibly without exposure to the
contingencies. The “concept” is “in the stimulus” as a deﬁning
property in (1) and it is named or otherwise speciﬁed in the rule of
(3). Since the topography of the response at issue is usually
arbitrary, it is quite likely that the behaviors in (2) and (4) will be
similar, and it is then particularly easy to suppose that one
responds to (1) because one “knows the rule” in (3).

Note 6.3

Some kinds of rules

A scientiﬁc law or a maxim enjoining prudent behavior differs from a
resolution, plan, or statement of purpose in the generality of the
contingencies which it supplements or replaces. Laws and maxims
describe long-lasting contingencies, and once discovered they can
be transmitted to and used by others. A resolution, plan, or
statement of purpose is constructed on the spot. It is much more
likely to be an incomplete description of contingencies, but it has
the same effect as a maxim or law to the extent that it identiﬁes a
response and the occasion upon which it may be reinforced. It may
also invoke additional reinforcers, positive or negative. A person
obeys a law and observes a maxim in part to avoid censure,

possibly self-imposed, for failing to do so. He keeps a resolution,
carries out a plan, and holds to a purpose in part for similar
reasons.
A model to be imitated is a fragmentary rule specifying the
topography of the imitative response. When we show someone
how to do something, we compose an imitative model. This is a
kind of instruction or direction. When we supply a copy or pattern to
be drawn or otherwise reconstructed (say in needlework), we are
also supplying a rule. There are many verbal examples (141).
Echoic behavior, taking dictation, and copying handwriting all
involve stimuli which can be interpreted as specifying topography of
behavior. A text is a particularly interesting case. It is a fragmentary
rule which directs the behavior of the reader, point for point.
We almost always restrict the word “study” to the acquisition of
rule-governed behavior. Although we may study a piece of
equipment if we are to do something with it, we do not usually say
that we are studying when we learn to operate it. We do not say
that a student is studying when he is actually driving a car or
training device, but we say that he studies a manual on how to
drive. The distinction seems to be that in the case of the manual,
the verbal behavior he eventually acquires is speciﬁed in the text.
There is no prior representation of the behavior of driving a car. It is
contingency-shaped. It is easy to see how the prior representation
is said to be learned, in the sense of stored within the learner. We
recall a rule, fragmentary or otherwise. We recall parts of a manual
on driving a car as we recite or paraphrase the text, but we do not
say that we are recalling driving a car as we drive one.
In an early experiment on discrimination (129) a rat repeatedly
pressed a lever and responses were reinforced provided a light
was on. If the light had been made progressively dimmer until it
could not be seen at all, the problem of “when to press the lever”
would have become insoluble. The contingencies would have been
indistinguishable from those of intermittent reinforcement. As long
as the light was available, a human subject could have devised
special ways of making it important as a discriminative stimulus. He
could also have formulated a rule, for use by himself or others,
either as an injunction (“Respond only when the light is on.”) or as
a description of the contingencies (“A response is followed by food
only when the light is on.”) The latter would be a scientiﬁc law in a
limited universe.
When no light is visible, no rule can be formulated, but stimuli

accidentally present when a response is reinforced may gain
control. Pigeons show this kind of superstitious behavior and so do
gamblers. A gambler who is conspicuously successful upon an
occasion when he is wearing a particular tie will sometimes wear it
again “for luck.” (Luck as we shall see in Chapter 9, is an
interesting explanatory ﬁction. Lady Luck stands in the same
relation to a gambler as a Muse to a poet. A series of successes is
attributed to a run of luck, and it is difﬁcult to believe that there is
not, indeed, some external cause.)
This does not mean that there are no useful rules regarding
unpredictable schedules. “Don’t gamble” is one. A gambling club
advises its patrons, “When you hit a winning streak, stop while
you’re still ahead.” If the club believes in winning streaks, it may
offer this advice in order to get lucky players away from its tables,
but there is a better reason. It is important that some players leave
when they are winning, since the club would not be popular if all
players stopped playing only when they had run out of money.
A betting system is a set of rules governing play. It is useful even
when it does not, in fact, dictate successful play. Men are often
punished for responding under the wrong circumstances and
blamed for neglecting useful information. To respond with no
indication of success is aversive, and one may escape by ﬁnding
some apparent indicator. An overheard remark containing the
name of a horse running in a race is the hunch upon which a bet is
placed. One can then blame the hunch if the bet doesn’t pay off. A
betting system has the effect of a water diviner (74). It costs money
to dig a well, and the well may not bring in water. The mistake will
be punishing, but one cannot avoid it by not digging. A dowser is
therefore called in; and if the well fails to bring in water, he can be
blamed. We ﬂip a coin in making a difﬁcult decision, and we can
then blame a wrong choice on the coin. The Department of
Defense, as well as large business organizations, uses decisionmaking systems, even when they are of questionable value,
whenever there are no good reasons for deciding one way or the
other. The system does not dictate good decisions, but it absolves
everyone from blame for bad ones.
When a person is asked why he does something, or why he
does it in a given way, his answer will usually refer to
contingencies. He may correctly identify the variables controlling his
behavior and in doing so he advances toward a rule which would

govern similar behavior if the original contingencies were defective
or lacking. He may be wrong, however; he may invent a set of
variables. He is particularly likely to do so if the actual variables are
grounds for punishment. This is rationalizing in the Freudian sense.
When the set is defective, his explanation has the form of a belief.
Thus he will not explain his superstitious behavior by confessing
that he has been affected by adventitious contingencies. Instead,
he will give “good reasons” for doing as he does. The superstitions
transmitted by a culture are rules for which there are no
corresponding contingencies. The paranoid is a specialist in
extracting rules from defective contingencies. When a man is
solving a problem, he may emit an effective solution before he can
describe its place in the contingencies. For example, he may form a
concept in the sense that he begins to respond consistently to a
set of stimuli before he can name or describe the property deﬁning
the set. We usually say that he gets the idea only when he names
the property, and we thus identify having an idea as being able to
formulate a rule. We propose ideas to others in the form of rules,
and the culture transmits what it has learned in that form.
A rule of thumb is no rule at all. Acting by rule of thumb is
contingency-shaped behavior. The thumb may be a successful
organ, but we do not need to explain its success by attributing
rules to it. “Flying by the seat of one’s pants” also seems to refer to
contingency-shaped behavior as distinct from following instructions.
It suggests that stimuli generated by the action of the plane on the
body of the ﬂyer are crucial, but ﬂying can also be shaped by
contingencies in which instrument readings are prominent.

Note 6.4

Differences between rule-governed and
contingency-shaped behavior

A scientist may play billiards intuitively as a result of long
experience, or he may determine masses, angles, distances,
frictions, and so on, and calculate each shot. He is likely to do the
former, of course, but there are analogous circumstances in which
he cannot submit to the contingencies in a comparable way and
must adopt the latter. Both kinds of behavior are plausible, natural,
and effective; they both show “knowledge of the contingencies,”
and (apart from the precurrent calculations in the second case)
they may have similar topographies. But they are under different
kinds of stimulus control and hence are different operants. The

difference appears when the scientist examines his behavior. In
the ﬁrst case he feels the rightness of the force and direction with
which the ball is struck; in the second he feels the rightness of his
calculations but not of the shot itself. (For an analysis of feelings,
see Chapter 8.)
It is the control of nature in the ﬁrst case with its attendant
feelings which suggests to Polanyi and Bridgman a kind of
personal involvement characteristic only of direct experience and
knowledge (see page 155). The point of science, however, is to
analyze the contingencies of reinforcement found in nature and to
formulate rules or laws which make it unnecessary to be exposed
to them in order to behave appropriately. What one sees in
watching oneself following the rules of science is therefore different
from what one sees in watching oneself behave as one has
learned to do under the contingencies which the rules describe.
The mistake is to suppose that only one of these kinds of behavior
represents knowledge. Polanyi argues that “tacit knowing is … the
dominant principle of all knowledge, and … its rejection would
therefore automatically involve the rejection of any knowledge
whatever” (111). It is true that an apprentice blacksmith may not
know why he is operating the bellows as he does—he may have
no “feel” for the effect on the ﬁre—but the rule, together with its
effect on his behavior, is still a “form of knowledge.”
Rogers (117) and Maslow (98) have tried to reverse the history of
psychological science to return to a kind of knowledge generated
by personal contingencies of reinforcement. They presumably do
not question the effectiveness of the rules and prescriptions which
may be drawn from a consideration of the circumstances under
which people behave or can be induced to behave, but they give
preference to personal knowledge which has the feeling of
contingency-shaped behavior. It is not too difﬁcult to make this
feeling seem important—as important as it seemed to Polanyi and
Bridgman in attempting to evaluate what we really know about the
world as a whole.
Rogers and Maslow feel threatened by the objectivity of scientiﬁc
knowledge and the possible absence of personal involvement in its
use; but the personal and social behavior shaped by social
contingencies has, except in rare instances, been as cold,
scheming, or brutal as the calculated behavior of a Machiavelli. We
have no guarantee that personal involvement will bring sympathy,

compassion, or understanding, for it has usually done just the
opposite. Social action based upon a scientiﬁc analysis of human
behavior is much more likely to be humane. It can be transmitted
from person to person and epoch to epoch, it can be freed of
personal predilections and prejudices, it can be constantly tested
against the facts, and it can steadily increase the competence with
which we solve human problems. If need be, it can inspire in its
devotées a feeling of rightness. Personal knowledge, whether
contingency-shaped or rule-governed, is not to be judged by how it
feels but by the help it offers in working toward a more effective
culture.
The behavior evoked by a rule is often simpler than the behavior
shaped by the contingencies from which the rule is derived. The
rule covers only the essentials; it may omit features which give
contingency-shape behavior its character. The sanctions which
make a rule effective also often make the behavior “cold.” Some
rule-governed behavior, however, may be more complete and
effective than contingency-shaped behavior. This is particularly the
case when the contingencies are defective. Rules can be derived
from a study of a reinforcing system (such as a sample space) or
from large samples of behavior reinforced by such a system, and
they will evoke behavior when reinforcing consequences are very
rare and contingency-shaped behavior therefore unlikely. Maxims
concerned with perseverance, for example, provide a necessary
supplement to contingencies which are weak in this sense.
Consequences which have a negligible effect in shaping behavior
may yield important actuarial rules. Few people drive a car at a
moderate speed and keep their seat belts fastened because they
have actually avoided or escaped from serious accidents by doing
so. Rules derived from contingencies affecting large numbers of
people bring these consequences to bear upon the individual.
Ethical and legal consequences work synergically with the natural
consequences which by themselves are ineffective.
Long-deferred consequences, ineffective in shaping behavior,
may also lead to useful rules. Ultimate utility is seldom important in
the shaping of behavior but may be maximized if certain rules are
followed. Rules of this sort are particularly valuable when they
oppose powerful contingencies. It is easy to consume now and
suffer shortages later, or to smoke now and die of lung cancer
later; but rules derived from actuarial data or from economics and
physiology may enable the long-term consequences to offset the

immediate.
Rule-governed behavior is particularly effective when the
contingencies would otherwise shape unwanted or wasteful
behavior. A species which has developed the capacity to learn
from one experience—to change its behavior as the result of a
single reinforcement—is vulnerable to adventitious reinforcement.
The reinforcer which follows a response need not be “produced by
it.” It may generate superstitious behavior. A study of many
instances, or of the reinforcing system, may lead to a rule opposing
the effects of coincidences. A general rule enjoining a person not
to acquire a response when adventitiously reinforced is unlikely,
but a large number of rules describing “genuine” connections
between behavior and consequences may emphasize the
uniqueness and hence the improbability of a given instance. Some
general rules about spatial, temporal, and physical causality have
this effect. If we shake a ﬁst at a passing airplane and the plane
suddenly veers, we are perhaps no more likely to shake our ﬁst
again to cause a plane to veer; but it is characteristic of
superstitious behavior that we engage in it even though we “know
by the rule” that it has no effect. The culture may ridicule
superstitious responses to the point at which we engage in them
only as a form of humor, but it is unlikely to eliminate them
altogether.
Many classical distinctions can be reduced to the distinction
between rule-governed and contingency-shaped behavior.
(1) Deliberation vs. impulse. Deliberate or reasoned behavior is
marked either by an examination of possibly relevant rules and the
selection of one or more to be obeyed or by an examination of
current contingencies and the derivation of a rule on the spot.
Acting on impulse is not preceded by behavior of this sort.
( 2 ) Ultimate vs. proximate gains. Rules tend to bring remote
consequences into play; without rules only immediate
consequences affect behavior.
(3 ) Culture-bound vs. “natural” behavior. Rules evolve with the
culture and differ among cultures; behavior shaped by nonsocial
contingencies is as universal as the contingencies.
(4) Surface vs. depths. Rule-governed behavior is superimposed
upon men. It is the veneer of civilization. Depth psychology is
concerned with the “real” contingencies.
(5 ) Contrived vs. natural. Rules are often followed for reasons

which are unrelated to the reinforcers in the contingencies from
which they are derived. Contingency-shaped behavior varies with
the deprivation or aversive stimulation related to those reinforcers.
(6 ) Intellect vs. emotion. Rule-governed behavior may be cold
and Stoical; contingency-shaped behavior is likely to be hot and
Epicurean. The protestant vs. the hedonist ethic.
(7) Logical argument vs. intuition. The behavior shaped by the
contingencies which arise as one solves a problem may yield a
solution “intuitively.” The solution appears, the problem is disposed
of, and no one knows why. The intuitive mathematician will,
however, probably be asked for a proof. He will be asked to supply
rules which will lead others from a statement of the problem to the
solution.
(8) Anxiety vs. joy. The ethical, legal, and other sanctions which
enforce rules are usually aversive and the emotional responses
associated with rule-governed behavior (“anxiety”) are then evoked
by preaversive stimuli. The strong positive reinforcers which shape
behavior directly are more likely to be associated with “joy.”
( 9 ) Monotony vs. variety. Rule-governed behavior is usually
designed to satisfy contingencies, not to duplicate other features
of the behavior shaped by them. Contingency-shaped behavior is
therefore likely to have a greater variety or richness.
(10) Conscious vs. unconscious. Since it is often the function of
a rule to identify stimuli, responses, and their consequences,
reasoned behavior is marked by reﬂection and awareness (see
Chapter 8). Freud assigned contingency-shaped behavior to the
unconscious. Presumably one must be conscious of one’s own
behavior either to discover a rule or to follow one.
(11) Knowing vs. knowing how. The knowledge which appears to
be objectiﬁed in rules is owned or held by those who know the
rules. Contingency-shaped behavior, simply as knowing how to do
things, is less likely to suggest a prior form of possession. In
experimental science the distinction is carried by rationalism vs.
empiricism and in theoretical science by reason vs. intuition.
(12) Formula vs. art. As Francis Bacon said, a painter or musician
excels “by a kind of felicity and not by rule,” where felicity seems to
refer to the happy consequences which guide the artist in lieu of
rules in the production of art.
(1 3 ) Reason vs. faith. Logical arguments for the existence of
God may produce rules governing pious conduct, but the behavior
of the mystic is shaped by events which testify to the immediate

presence of God. (The mystic cannot share his experience in the
sense of formulating rules which will generate similar behavior in
those who are not subject to direct mystical contingencies.)
(1 4 ) Rule vs. deed (or word vs. deed?). Another theological
issue: the good man may or may not know what is right, but he
does what is right, and he does it because he is naturally good,
not because he can follow good rules. He can therefore be
credited with behaving well, not simply with following rules well.
Compare the antinomianism of the hippy—in a condition often
attributed to anomie.
(15) Truth vs. belief. The distinction between rule-governed and
contingency-shaped behavior resolves an issue ﬁrst raised in its
modern form by C. S. Peirce, William James, and John Dewey: the
distinction between truth and belief. Truth is concerned with rules
and rules for the transformation for rules. And it has the objectivity
associated with analyses of contingencies of reinforcement. Belief
is a matter of probability of action and the probability is a function
of the contingencies—either the unanalyzed contingencies to be
found in the environment or the contingencies contrived by a
culture in teaching the truth.
(1 6 ) Reason vs. passion (or vs. instinct or vs. nature). “The
greatest philosopher in the world,” said Pascal, “standing on a
plank broader than needed to support him but over a precipice, will
be controlled by his imagination even though his reason convinces
him that he is safe.” It is not his imagination but earlier
contingencies which evoke the behavior of being afraid (and some
of these contingencies may be phylogenic). Reason, on the other
hand, refers to an analysis of the actual contingencies, which might
lead to a rule such as: “You may stand on the plank without
falling.” The conﬂict is between contingencies; each set controls its
own response, and the responses are incompatible.
“The heart has its reasons which reason cannot know.” Pascal
may have been talking about reason and passion, but passion was
not just emotion. Contingencies of reinforcement are “reasons” for
acting, and when an analysis of these reasons gives rise to rules
which govern effective action, it is not a pun to equate the result
with reason in general. The physiological distinction between the
head and the heart is, of course, now out of date, and so
presumably is that between autonomic and skeletal nervous
systems. We may appear to abandon reason when we “ﬂy into a

blind rage,” but the head is involved in this as much as the heart,
the skeletal as much as the autonomic nervous system. Nor will a
distinction between instinctive and learned behavior sufﬁce. Pascal
seems to be saying simply that rule-governed and contingencyshaped behavior are different and that the former cannot simulate
all the latter. Contingencies contain reasons which rules can never
specify.

7

The phylogeny and ontogeny of
behavior

Parts of the behavior of an organism concerned with the internal
economy, as in respiration or digestion, have always been
accepted as “inherited,” and there is no reason why some
responses to the external environment should not also come
ready-made in the same sense. It is widely believed that many
students of behavior disagree. The classical reference is to John B.
Watson (164):
I should like to go one step further now and say, “Give me a dozen healthy infants, wellformed, and my own speciﬁed world to bring them up in and I’ll guarantee to take any one at
random and train him to become any type of specialist I might select—doctor, lawyer, artist,
merchant-chief and, yes, even beggerman and thief, regardless of his talents, penchants,
tendencies, abilities, vocations, and race of his ancestors.” I am going beyond my facts and I
admit it, but so have the advocates of the contrary and they have been doing it for many
thousands of years.

Watson was not denying that a substantial part of behavior is
inherited. His challenge appears in the ﬁrst of four chapters
describing “how man is equipped to behave at birth.” As an
enthusiastic specialist in the psychology of learning he went
beyond his facts to emphasize what could be done in spite of
genetic limitations. He was actually, as Gray (57) has pointed out,
“one of the earliest and one of the most careful workers in the area
of animal ethology.” Yet he is probably responsible for the
persistent myth of what has beeen called “behaviorism’s
counterfactual dogma” (67). And it is a myth. No reputable student
of animal behavior has ever taken the position “that the animal
comes to the laboratory as a virtual tabula rasa, that species
differences are insigniﬁcant, and that all responses are about
equally conditionable to all stimuli” (26).
But what does it mean to say that behavior is inherited? Lorenz
(93) has noted that ethologists are not agreed on “the concept of
‘what we formerly called innate.”’ Insofar as the behavior of an
organism is simply the physiology of an anatomy, the inheritance of
behavior is the inheritance of certain bodily features, and there
should be no problem concerning the meaning of “innate” that is

not raised by any genetic trait. Perhaps we must qualify the
statement that a man inherits a visual reﬂex, but we must also
qualify the statement that he inherits his eye color.
If the anatomical features underlying behavior were as
conspicuous as the wings of Drosophila, we should describe them
directly and deal with their inheritance in the same way, but at the
moment we must be content with so-called behavioral
manifestations. We describe the behaving organism in terms of its
gross anatomy, and we shall no doubt eventually describe the
behavior of its ﬁner structures in much the same way, but until then
we analyze behavior without referring to ﬁne structures and are
constrained to do so even when we wish to make inferences about
them.
What features of behavior will eventually yield a satisfactory
genetic account? Some kind of inheritance is implied by such
concepts as “racial memory” or “death instinct,” but a sharper
speciﬁcation is obviously needed. The behavior observed in mazes
and similar apparatuses may be “objective,” but it is not described
in dimensions which yield a meaningful genetic picture. Tropisms
and taxes are somewhat more readily quantiﬁed, but not all
behavior can be thus formulated, and organisms selected for
breeding according to tropistic or taxic performances may still differ
in other ways (43).
The probability that an organism will behave in a given way is a
more promising datum, but very little has been done in studying its
genetics. Modes of inheritance are not, however, the only issues.

The provenance of behavior
Upon a given occasion we observe that an animal displays a
certain kind of behavior—learned or unlearned. We describe its
topography and evaluate its probability. We discover variables,
genetic or environmental, of which the probability is a function. We
then undertake to predict or control the behavior. All this concerns
a current state of the organism. We have still to ask where the
behavior (or the structures which thus behave) came from. What we
may call the ontogeny of behavior can be traced to contingencies
of reinforcement, and in a famous passage Pascal suggested that
ontogeny and phylogeny have something in common. “Habit,” he
said, “is a second nature which destroys the ﬁrst. But what is this
nature? Why is habit not natural? I am very much afraid that nature

is itself only first habit as habit is second nature.”
The provenance of “ﬁrst habit” has an important place in theories
of the evolution of behavior. A given response is in a sense
strengthened by consequences which have to do with the survival
of the individual and the species. A given form of behavior leads
not to reinforcement but to procreation. (Sheer reproductive activity
does not, of course, always contribute to the survival of a species,
as the problems of overpopulation remind us. A few well-fed
breeders presumably enjoy an advantage over a larger but
impoverished population. The advantage may also be selective. It
has recently been suggested (169) that some forms of behavior
such as the defense of a territory have an important effect in
restricting breeding.) Several practical problems raised by what may
be called contingencies of selection are remarkably similar to
problems which have already been approached experimentally with
respect to contingencies of reinforcement.
An identiﬁable unit. A behavioral process, as a change in
frequency of response, can be followed only if it is possible to
count responses. The topography of an operant need not be
completely ﬁxed, but some deﬁning property must be available to
identify instances. An emphasis upon the occurrence of a
repeatable unit distinguishes an experimental analysis of behavior
from historical or anecdotal accounts. A similar requirement is
recognized in ethology. As Julian Huxley has said, “This concept …
of unit releasers which act as speciﬁc key stimuli unlocking
genetically determined unit behavior patterns … is probably the
most important single contribution of Lorenzian ethology to the
science of behavior” (73).
The action of stimuli. Operant reinforcement not only strengthens
a given response; it brings the response under the control of a
stimulus. But the stimulus does not elicit the response as in a
reﬂex; it merely sets the occasion upon which the response is more
likely to occur. The ethologists’ “releaser” also simply sets an
occasion. Like the discriminative stimulus, it increases the
probability of occurrence of a unit of behavior but does not force it.
The principal difference between a reﬂex and an instinct is not in
the complexity of the response but in, respectively, the eliciting and
releasing actions of the stimulus.

Origins of variations. Ontogenic contingencies remain ineffective
until a response has occurred. The rat must press the lever at least
once “for other reasons” before it presses it “for food.” There is a
similar limitation in phylogenic contingencies. An animal must emit a
cry at least once for other reasons before the cry can be selected
as a warning because of the advantage to the species. It follows
that the entire repertoire of an individual or species must exist prior
to ontogenic or phylogenic selection, but only in the form of minimal
units. Both phylogenic and ontogenic contingencies “shape”
complex forms of behavior from relatively undifferentiated material.
Both processes are favored if the organism shows an extensive,
undifferentiated repertoire.
Programmed contingencies. It is usually not practical to condition
a complex operant by waiting for an instance to occur and then
reinforcing it. A terminal performance must be reached through
intermediate contingencies (programmed instruction). In a
demonstration experiment a rat pulled a chain to obtain a marble
from a rack, picked up the marble with its forepaws, carried it to a
tube projecting two inches above the floor of its cage, lifted it to the
top of the tube, and dropped it inside. “Every step in the process
had to be worked out through a series of approximations since the
component responses were not in the original repertoire of the rat”
(129). The “program” was as follows. The rat was reinforced for any
movement which caused a marble to roll over any edge of the ﬂoor
of its cage, then only over the edge on one side of the cage, then
over only a small section of the edge, then over only that section
slightly raised, and so on. The raised edge became a tube of
gradually diminishing diameter and increasing height. The earlier
member of the chain, release of the marble from the rack, was
added later. Other kinds of programming have been used to
establish subtle stimulus control to sustain behavior in spite of
infrequent reinforcement, and so on (152).
A similar programming of complex phylogenic contingencies is
familiar in evolutionary theory. The environment may change,
demanding that behavior which contributes to survival for a given
reason become more complex. Quite different advantages may be
responsible for different stages. To take a familiar example, the
electric organ of the eel could have become useful in stunning prey
only after developing something like its present power. Must we

attribute the completed organ to a single complex mutation, or
were intermediate stages developed because of other
advantages? Much weaker currents, for example, may have
permitted the eel to detect the nature of objects with which it was in
contact. The same question may be asked about behavior.
Pascal’s “ﬁrst habit” must often have been the product of
“programmed instruction.” Many of the complex phylogenic
contingencies which now seem to sustain behavior must have
been reached through intermediate stages in which less complex
forms had lesser but still effective consequences.
The need for programming is a special case of a more general
principle. We do not explain any system of behavior simply by
demonstrating that it works to the advantage of, or has “net utility”
for, the individual or species. It is necessary to show that a given
advantage is contingent upon behavior in such a way as to alter its
probability.
Adventitious contingencies. It is not true, as Lorenz (93) has
asserted, that “adaptiveness is always the irrefutable proof that this
process [of adaptation] has taken place.” Behavior may have
advantages which have played no role in its selection. The
converse is also true. Events which follow behavior but are not
necessarily produced by it may have a selective effect. A hungry
pigeon placed in an apparatus in which a food dispenser operates
every twenty seconds regardless of what the pigeon is doing
acquires a stereotyped response which is shaped and sustained
by wholly coincidental reinforcement. The behavior is often
“ritualistic”; we call it superstitious (132). There is presumably a
phylogenic parallel. All current characteristics of an organism do not
necessarily contribute to its survival and procreation, yet they are
all nevertheless “selected.” Useless structures with associated
useless functions are as inevitable as superstitious behavior. Both
become more likely as organisms become more sensitive to
contingencies. It should occasion no surprise that behavior has not
perfectly adjusted to either ontogenic or phylogenic contingencies.
Unstable and intermittent contingencies. Both phylogenic and
ontogenic contingencies are effective even though intermittent.
Different schedules of reinforcement generate different patterns of
changing probabilities. If there is a phylogenic parallel, it is
obscure. A form of behavior generated by intermittent selective

contingencies is presumably likely to survive a protracted period in
which the contingencies are not in force, because it has already
proved powerful enough to survive briefer periods, but this is only
roughly parallel with the explanation of the greater resistance to
extinction of intermittently reinforced operants.
Changing contingencies. Contingencies also change, and the
behaviors for which they are responsible then change too. When
ontogenic contingencies specifying topography of response are
relaxed, the topography usually deteriorates; and when
reinforcements are no longer forthcoming, the operant undergoes
extinction. Darwin discussed phylogenic parallels in The Expression
of Emotions in Man and Animals. His “serviceable associated
habits” were apparently both learned and unlearned, and he
seems to have assumed that ontogenic contingencies contribute to
the inheritance of behavior, at least in generating responses which
may then have phylogenic consequences. The behavior of the
domestic dog in turning around before lying down on a smooth
surface may have been selected by contingencies under which the
behavior made a useful bed in grass or brush. If dogs now show
this behavior less frequently, it is presumably because a sort of
phylogenic extinction has set in. The domestic cat shows a
complex response of covering feces which must once have had
survival value with respect to predation or disease. The dog has
been more responsive to the relaxed contingencies arising from
domestication or some other change in predation or disease, and
shows the behavior in vestigial form.
Multiple contingencies. An operant may be affected by more
than one kind of reinforcement, and a given form of behavior may
be traced to more than one advantage to the individual or the
species. Two phylogenic or ontogenic consequences may work
together or oppose each other in the development of a given
response and presumably show “algebraic summation” when
opposed.
Social contingencies. The contingencies responsible for social
behavior raise special problems in both phylogeny and ontogeny.
In the development of a language the behavior of a speaker can
become more elaborate only as listeners become sensitive to
elaborated speech. A similarly coordinated development must be

assumed in the phylogeny of social behavior. The dance of the
bee returning from a successful foray can have advantageous
effects for the species only when other bees behave appropriately
with respect to it, but they cannot develop the behavior until the
dance appears. The terminal system must have required a kind of
subtle programing in which the behaviors of both “speaker” and
“listener” passed through increasingly complex stages. A bee
returning from a successful foray may behave in a special way
because it is excited or fatigued, and it may show phototropic
responses related to recent visual stimulation. If the strength of the
behavior varies with the quantity or quality of food the bee has
discovered and with the distance and direction it has ﬂown, then
the behavior may serve as an important stimulus to other bees,
even though its characteristics have not yet been affected by such
consequences. If different bees behave in different ways, then
more effective versions should be selected. If the behavior of a
successful bee evokes behavior on the part of listeners which is
reinforcing to the speaker, then the speaker’s behavior should be
ontogenically intensiﬁed. The phylogenic development of
responsive behavior in the listener should contribute to the ﬁnal
system by providing for immediate reinforcement of conspicuous
forms of the dance.
The speaker’s behavior may become less elaborate if the listener
continues to respond to less elaborate forms. We stop someone
who is approaching us by pressing our palm against his chest, but
he eventually learns to stop upon seeing our outstretched palm.
The practical response becomes a gesture. A similar shift in
phylogenic contingencies may account for the “intentional
movements” of the ethologists.
Behavior may be intensiﬁed or elaborated under differential
reinforcement involving the stimulation either of the behaving
organism or of others. The more conspicuous a superstitious
response, for example, the more effective the adventitious
contingencies. Behavior is especially likely to become more
conspicuous when reinforcement is contingent on the response of
another organism. Some ontogenic instances, called “ritualization,”
are easily demonstrated. Many elaborate rituals of primarily
phylogenic origin have been described by ethologists.

Some problems raised by phylogenic contingencies

Lorenz has recently argued that “our absolute ignorance of the
physiological mechanisms underlying learning makes our
knowledge of the causation of phyletic adaptation seem quite
considerable by comparison” (93). But genetic and behavioral
processes are studied and formulated in a rigorous way without
reference to the underlying biochemistry. With respect to the
provenance of behavior we know much more about ontogenic
contingencies
than
phylogenic.
Moreover,
phylogenic
contingencies raise some very difﬁcult problems which have no
ontogenic parallels.
The contingencies responsible for unlearned behavior acted a
very long time ago. The natural selection of a given form of
behavior, no matter how plausibly argued, remains an inference.
We can set up phylogenic contingencies under which a given
property of behavior arbitrarily selects individuals for breeding, and
thus demonstrate modes of behavioral inheritance, but the
experimenter who makes the selection is performing a function of
the natural environment which also needs to be studied. Just as
the reinforcements arranged in an experimental analysis must be
shown to have parallels in “real life” if the results of the analysis are
to be signiﬁcant or useful, so the contingencies which select a
given behavioral trait in a genetic experiment must be shown to
play a plausible role in natural selection.
Although ontogenic contingencies are easily subjected to an
experimental analysis, phylogenic contingencies are not. When the
experimenter has shaped a complex response, such as dropping a
marble into a tube, the provenance of the behavior raises no
problem. The performance may puzzle anyone seeing it for the ﬁrst
time, but it is easily traced to recent, possibly recorded, events. No
comparable history can be invoked when a spider is observed to
spin a web. We have not seen the phylogenic contingencies at
work. All we know is that spiders of a given kind build more or less
the same kind of web. Our ignorance often adds a touch of
mystery. We are likely to view inherited behavior with a kind of awe
not inspired by acquired behavior of similar complexity.
The remoteness of phylogenic contingencies affects our scientific
methods, both experimental and conceptual. Until we have
identiﬁed the variables of which an event is a function, we tend to
invent causes. Learned behavior was once commonly attributed to
“habit,” but an analysis of contingencies of reinforcement has made

the term unnecessary. “Instinct,” as a hypothetical cause of
phylogenic behavior, has had a longer life. We no longer say that
our rat possesses a marble-dropping habit, but we are still likely to
say that our spider has a web-spinning instinct. The concept of
instinct has been severely criticized and is now used with caution or
altogether avoided, but explanatory entities serving a similar
function still survive in the writings of many ethologists.
A “mental apparatus,” for example, no longer ﬁnds a useful place
in the experimental analysis of behavior, but it survives in
discussions of phylogenic contingencies. Here are a few sentences
from the writings of prominent ethologists which refer to
consciousness or awareness: “The young gosling … gets imprinted
upon its mind the image of the ﬁrst moving object it sees” (W. H.
Thorpe, 158); “the infant expresses the inner state of contentment
by smiling” (Julian Huxley, 73); “[herring gulls show a] lack of insight
into the ends served by their activities” (Tinbergen, 159);
“[chimpanzees were unable] to communicate to others the unseen
things in their minds” (Frankenberger and Kortlandt, 85).
In some mental activities awareness may not be critical, but other
cognitive activities are invoked. Thorpe (158) speaks of a
disposition “which leads the animal to pay particular attention to
objects of a certain kind.” What we observe is simply that objects of
a certain kind are especially effective stimuli. The ontogenic
contingencies which generate the behavior called “paying
attention” presumably have phylogenic parallels. Other mental
activities frequently mentioned by ethologists include “organizing
experience” and “discovering relations.” Expressions of all these
sorts show that we have not yet accounted for the behavior in
terms of contingencies, phylogenic or ontogenic. Unable to show
how the organism can behave effectively under complex
circumstances, we endow it with a special cognitive ability which
permits it to do so.
Other concepts replaced by a more effective analysis include
“need” or “drive” and “emotion.” In ontogenic behavior we no longer
say that a given set of environmental conditions ﬁrst gives rise to
an inner state which the organism then expresses or resolves by
behaving in a given way. We no longer represent relations among
emotional and motivational variables as relations among such
states, as in saying that hunger overcomes fear. We no longer use
dynamic analogies or metaphors, as in explaining sudden action as
the overflow or bursting out of dammed-up needs or drives. If these

are common practices in ethology, it is evidently because the
functional relations they attempt to formulate are not clearly
understood.
Another kind of innate endowment, particularly likely to appear in
explanations of human behavior, takes the form of “traits” or
“abilities.” Though often measured quantitatively, their dimensions
are meaningful only in placing the individual with respect to a
population. The behavior measured is almost always obviously
learned. To say that intelligence is inherited is not to say that
speciﬁc forms of behavior are inherited. Phylogenic contingencies
conceivably responsible for “the selection of intelligence” do not
specify responses. What has been selected appears to be a
susceptibility to ontogenic contingencies, leading particularly to a
greater speed of conditioning and the capacity to maintain a larger
repertoire without confusion.
It is often said that an analysis of behavior in terms of ontogenic
contingencies “leaves something out of account,” and this is true. It
leaves out of account habits, ideas, cognitive processes, needs,
drives, traits, and so on. But it does not neglect the facts upon
which these concepts are based. It seeks a more effective
formulation of the very contingencies to which those who use such
concepts must eventually turn to explain their explanations. The
strategy has been highly successful at the ontogenic level, where
the contingencies are relatively clear. As the nature and mode of
operation of phylogenic contingencies come to be better
understood, a similar strategy should yield comparable
advantages.

Identifying phylogenic and ontogenic variables
The signiﬁcance of ontogenic variables may be assessed by
holding genetic conditions as constant as possible—for example,
by studying “pure” strains or identical twins. The technique has a
long history. According to Plutarch ( De Puerorum Educatione)
Licurgus, a Spartan, demonstrated the importance of environment
by raising two puppies from the same litter so that one became a
good hunter while the other preferred food from a plate. On the
other hand, genetic variables may be assessed either by studying
organisms upon which the environment has had little opportunity to
act (because they are newborn or have been reared in a controlled
environment) or by comparing groups subject to extensive, but on

the average probably similar, environmental histories. Behavior
exhibited by most of the members of a species is often accepted
as inherited if it is unlikely that all the members could have been
exposed to relevant ontogenic contingencies.
When contingencies are not obvious, it is perhaps unwise to call
any behavior either inherited or acquired. Field observations, in
particular, will often not permit a distinction. Friedmann (50) has
described the behavior of the African honey guide as follows:
When the bird is ready to begin guiding, it either comes to a person and starts a repetitive
series of churring notes or it stays where it is and begins calling….
As the person comes to within 15 or 20 feet … the bird ﬂies off with an initial conspicuous
downward dip, and then goes off to another tree, not necessarily in sight of the follower, in fact
more often out of sight than not. Then it waits there, churring loudly until the follower again
nears it, when the action is repeated. This goes on until the vicinity of the bees’ nest is
reached. Here the bird suddenly ceases calling and perches quietly in a tree nearby. It waits
there for the follower to open the hive, and it usually remains there until the person has
departed with his loot of honey-comb, when it comes down to the plundered bees’ nest and
begins to feed on the bits of comb left strewn about.

The author is quoted as saying that the behavior is “purely
instinctive,” but it is possible to explain almost all of it in other ways.
If we assume that honey guides eat broken bees’ nests and
cannot eat unbroken nests, that men (not to mention baboons and
ratels) break bees’ nests, and that birds more easily discover
unbroken nests, then only one other assumption is needed to
explain the behavior in ontogenic terms. We must assume that the
response which produces the churring note is elicited either (1) by
any stimulus which frequently precedes the receipt of food
(comparable behavior is shown by a hungry dog jumping about
when food is being prepared for it) or (2) when food, ordinarily
available, is missing (the dog jumps about when food is not being
prepared for it on schedule). An unconditioned honey guide
occasionally sees men breaking nests. It waits until they have
gone, and then eats the remaining scraps. Later it sees men near
but not breaking nests, either because they have not yet found the
nests or have not yet reached them. The sight of a man near a
nest, or the sight of man when the buzzing of bees around a nest
can be heard, begins to function in either of the ways just noted to
elicit the churring response. The ﬁrst step in the construction of the
ﬁnal pattern is thus taken by the honey guide. The second step is

taken by the man (or baboon or ratel, as the case may be). The
churring sound becomes a conditioned stimulus in the presence of
which a search for bees’ nests is frequently successful. The
buzzing of bees would have the same effect if the man could hear
it.
The next change occurs in the honey guide. When a man
approaches and breaks up a nest, his behavior begins to function
as a conditioned reinforcer which, together with the fragments
which he leaves behind, reinforces churring, which then becomes
more probable under the circumstances and emerges primarily as
an operant rather than as an emotional response. When this has
happened, the geographical arrangements work themselves out
naturally. Men learn to move toward the churring sound, and they
break nests more often after walking toward nests than after
walking in other directions. The honey guide is therefore
differentially reinforced when it takes a position which induces men
to walk toward a nest. The contingencies are subtle, but we should
remember that the final topography is often far from perfect.
As we have seen, contingencies which involve two or more
organisms raise special problems. The churring of the honey guide
is useless until men respond to it, but men will not respond in an
appropriate way until the churring is related to the location of bees’
nests. The conditions just described compose a sort of program
which could lead to the terminal performance. It may be that the
conditions will not often arise, but another characteristic of social
contingencies quickly takes over. When one honey guide and one
man have entered into this symbiotic arrangement, conditions
prevail under which other honey guides and other men will be
much more rapidly conditioned. A second man will more quickly
learn to go in the direction of the churring sound because the
sound is already spatially related to bees’ nests. A second honey
guide will more readily learn to churr in the right places because
men respond in a way which reinforces that behavior. When a large
number of birds have learned to guide and a large number of men
have learned to be guided, conditions are highly favorable for
maintaining the system. (It is said that, where men no longer bother
to break bees’ nests, they no longer comprise an occasion for
churring, and the honey guide turns to the ratel or baboon. The
change in contingencies has occurred too rapidly to work through
natural selection. Possibly an instinctive response has been
unlearned, but the effect is more plausibly interpreted as the

extinction of an operant.)
Imprinting is another phenomenon which shows how hard it is to
detect the nature and effect of phylogenic contingencies. In
Thomas More’s Utopia, eggs were incubated. The chicks “are no
sooner out of the shell, and able to stir about, but they seem to
consider those that feed them as their mothers, and follow them as
other chickens do the hen that hatched them.” Later accounts of
imprinting have been reviewed by Gray (57). Various facts suggest
phylogenic origins: the response of following an imprinted object
appears at a certain age; if it cannot appear then, it may not
appear at all; and so on. Some experiments by Peterson (110),
however, suggest that what is inherited is not the behavior of
following but a susceptibility to reinforcement by proximity to the
mother or mother surrogate. A distress call reduces the distance
between mother and chick when the mother responds
appropriately, and walking toward the mother has the same effect.
Both behaviors may therefore be reinforced (68), but they appear
before these ontogenic contingencies come into play and are,
therefore, in part at least phylogenic. In the laboratory, however,
other behaviors can be made effective which phylogenic
contingencies are not likely to have strengthened. A chick can be
conditioned to peck a key, for example, by moving an imprinted
object toward it when it pecks or to walk away from the object if,
through a mechanical arrangement, this behavior actually brings
the object closer. To the extent that chicks follow an imprinted
object simply because they thus bring the object closer or prevent it
from becoming more distant, the behavior could be said to be
“species-speciﬁc” in the unusual sense that it is the product of
ontogenic contingencies which prevail for all members of the
species.
Ontogenic and phylogenic behaviors are not distinguished by
any essence or character. Form of response seldom if ever yields
useful classiﬁcations. The verbal response Fire! may be a
command to a ﬁring squad, a call for help, or an answer to the
question, What do you see? The topography tells us little, but the
controlling variables permit us to distinguish three very different
verbal operants (141). The sheer forms of instinctive and learned
behaviors also tell us little. Animals court, mate, ﬁght, hunt, and
rear their young, and they use the same effectors in much the
same way in all sorts of learned behavior. Behavior is behavior

whether learned or unlearned; it is only the controlling variables
which make a difference. The difference is not always important.
We might show that a honey guide is controlled by the buzzing of
bees rather than by the sight of a nest, for example, without
prejudice to the question of whether the behavior is innate or
acquired.
Nevertheless the distinction is important if we are to undertake to
predict or control the behavior. Implications for human affairs have
often affected the design of research and the conclusions drawn
from it. A classical example concerns the practice of exogamy.
Popper (114) writes:
Mill and his psychologistic school of sociology … would try to explain [rules of exogamy]
by an appeal to ‘human nature,’ for instance to some sort of instinctive aversion against
incest (developed perhaps through natural selection …); and something like this would also
be the naïve or popular explanation. [From Marx’s] point of view … however, one could ask
whether it is not the other way round, that is to say, whether the apparent instinct is not rather
a product of education, the effect rather than the cause of the social rules and traditions
demanding exogamy and forbidding incest. It is clear that these two approaches correspond
exactly to the very ancient problem whether social laws are “natural” or “conventions.” …

Much earlier, in his Supplement to the Voyage of Bougainville ,
Diderot (40) considered the question of whether there is a natural
basis for sexual modesty or shame (pudeur). Though he was
writing nearly a hundred years before Darwin, he pointed to a
possible basis for natural selection. “The pleasures of love are
followed by a weakness which puts one at the mercy of one’s
enemies. That is the only natural thing about modesty; the rest is
convention.” Those who are preoccupied with sex are exposed to
attack (indeed, may be stimulating attack); hence, those who
engage in sexual behavior under cover are more likely to breed
successfully. Here are phylogenic contingencies which either make
sexual behavior under cover stronger than sexual behavior in the
open or reinforce the taking of cover when sexual behavior is
strong. Ontogenic contingencies through which organisms seek
cover to avoid disturbances during sexual activity are also
plausible.
The issue has little to do with the character of incestuous or
sexual behavior, or with the way people “feel” about it. The basic
distinction is between provenances. And provenance is important
because it tells us something about how behavior can be

supported or changed. Most of the controversy concerning heredity
and environment has arisen in connection with the practical control
of behavior through the manipulation of relevant variables.

Interrelations among phylogenic and ontogenic variables
The ways in which animals behave compose a sort of taxonomy of
behavior comparable to other taxonomic parts of biology. Only a
very small percentage of existing species has as yet been
investigated. (A taxonomy of behavior may indeed be losing
ground as new species are discovered.) Moreover, only a small part
of the repertoire of any species is ever studied (see Note 7.3).
Nothing approaching a fair sampling of species-speciﬁc behavior is
therefore ever likely to be made.
Specialists in phylogenic contingencies often complain that those
who study learned behavior neglect the genetic limitations of their
subjects, as the comparative anatomist might object to conclusions
drawn from the intensive study of a single species. Beach, for
example, has written (12): “Many … appear to believe that in
studying the rat they are studying all or nearly all that is important
in behavior…. How else are we to interpret … [a] 457-page opus
which is based exclusively upon the performance of rats in barpressing situations but is entitled simply The Behavior of
Organisms?“ There are many precedents for concentrating on one
species (or at most a very few species) in biological investigations.
Mendel discovered the basic laws of genetics—in the garden pea.
Morgan worked out the theory of the gene—for the fruitﬂy.
Sherrington investigated the integrative action of the nervous
system—in the dog and cat. Pavlov studied the physiological
activity of the cerebral cortex—in the dog.
In the experimental analysis of behavior many species
differences are minimized. Stimuli are chosen to which the species
under investigation can respond and which do not elicit or release
disrupting responses: visual stimuli are not used if the organism is
blind, or very bright lights if they evoke evasive action. A response
is chosen which may be emitted at a high rate without fatigue and
which will operate recording and controlling equipment: we do not
reinforce a monkey when it pecks a disk with its nose or a pigeon
when it trips a toggle switch—though we might do so if we wished.
Reinforcers are chosen which are indeed reinforcing, either
positively or negatively. In this way species differences in sensory

equipment, in effector systems, in susceptibility to reinforcement,
and in possibly disruptive repertoires are minimized. The data then
show an extraordinary uniformity over a wide range of species. For
example, the processes of extinction, discrimination, and
generalization, and the performances generated by various
schedules of reinforcement are reassuringly similar. (Those who are
interested in ﬁne structure may interpret these practices as
minimizing the importance of sensory and motor areas in the cortex
and emotional and motivational areas in the brain stem, leaving for
study the processes associated with nerve tissue as such, rather
than with gross anatomy.) Although species differences exist and
should be studied, an exhaustive analysis of the behavior of a
single species is as easily justiﬁed as the study of the chemistry or
microanatomy of nerve tissue in one species.
A rather similar objection has been lodged against the extensive
use of domesticated animals in laboratory research (78).
Domesticated animals offer many advantages. They are more
easily handled, they thrive and breed in captivity, they are resistant
to the infections encountered in association with men, and so on.
Moreover, we are primarily interested in the most domesticated of
all animals—man. Wild animals are, of course, different—possibly
as different from domesticated varieties as some species are from
others, but both kinds of differences may be treated in the same
way in the study of basic processes.
The behavioral taxonomist may also argue that the contrived
environment of the laboratory is defective since it does not evoke
characteristic phylogenic behavior. A pigeon in a small enclosed
space pecking a disk which operates a mechanical food dispenser
is behaving very differently from pigeons at large. But in what
sense is this behavior not “natural”? If there is a natural phylogenic
environment, it must be the environment in which a given kind of
behavior evolved. But the phylogenic contingencies responsible for
current behavior lie in the distant past. Within a few thousand years
—a period much too short for genetic changes of any great
magnitude—all current species have been subjected to drastic
changes in climate, predation, food supply, shelter, and so on.
Certainly no land mammal is now living in the environment which
selected its principal genetic features, behavioral or otherwise.
Current environments are almost as “unnatural” as a laboratory. In
any case, behavior in a natural habitat would have no special claim
to genuineness. What an organism does is a fact about that

organism regardless of the conditions under which it does it. A
behavioral process is none the less real for being exhibited in an
arbitrary setting.
The relative importance of phylogenic and ontogenic
contingencies cannot be argued from instances in which unlearned
or learned behavior intrudes or dominates. Breland and Breland
(26) have used operant conditioning and programming to train
performing animals. They conditioned a pig to deposit large
wooden coins in a “piggy bank.” “The coins were placed several
feet from the bank and the pig required to carry them to the bank
and deposit them…. At ﬁrst the pig would eagerly pick up one
dollar, carry it to the bank, run back, get another, carry it rapidly
and neatly, and so on…. Thereafter, over a period of weeks the
behavior would become slower and slower. He might run over
eagerly for each dollar, but on the way back, instead of carrying
the dollar and depositing it simply and cleanly, he would repeatedly
drop it, root it, drop it again, root it along the way, pick it up, toss it
up in the air, drop it, root it some more, and so on.” They also
conditioned a chicken to deliver plastic capsules containing small
toys by moving them toward the purchaser with one or two sharp
straight pecks. The chickens began to grab at the capsules and
“pound them up and down on the ﬂoor of the cage,” perhaps as if
they were breaking seed pods or pieces of food too large to be
swallowed. Since other reinforcers were not used, we cannot be
sure that these phylogenic forms of food-getting behavior
appeared because the objects were manipulated under foodreinforcement. The conclusion is plausible, however, and not
disturbing. A shift in controlling variables is often observed. Under
reinforcement on a so-called “ﬁxed-interval schedule,” competing
behavior emerges at predictable points (103). The intruding
behavior may be learned or unlearned. It may disrupt a
performance or, as Kelleher (80) has shown, it may not. The facts
do not show an inherently greater power of phylogenic
contingencies in general. Indeed, the intrusions may occur in the
other direction. A hungry pigeon which was being trained to guide
missile s (143) was reinforced with food on a schedule which
generated a high rate of pecking at a target projected on a plastic
disk. It began to peck at the food as rapidly as at the target. The
rate was too high to permit it to take grains into its mouth, and it
began to starve. A product of ontogenic contingencies had

suppressed one of the most powerful phylogenic activities. The
behavior of civilized man shows the extent to which environmental
variables may mask an inherited endowment.

Misleading similarities
Since phylogenic and ontogenic contingencies act at different
times and shape and maintain behavior in different ways, it is
dangerous to try to arrange their products on a single continuum or
to describe them with a single set of terms.
An apparent resemblance concerns intention or purpose (see
page 107). Behavior which is inﬂuenced by its consequences
seems to be directed toward the future. We say that spiders spin
webs in order to catch ﬂies and that men set nets in order to catch
ﬁsh. The “order” is temporal. No account of either form of behavior
would be complete if it did not make some reference to its effects.
But ﬂies or ﬁsh which have not yet been caught cannot affect
behavior. Only past effects are relevant. Spiders which have built
effective webs have been more likely to leave offspring, and setting
a net in a way that has caught ﬁsh has been reinforced. Both
forms of behavior are therefore more likely to occur again, but for
very different reasons.
The concept of purpose has had an important place in
evolutionary theory. It is still sometimes said to be needed to
explain the variations upon which natural selection operates. In
human behavior a “felt intention” or “sense of purpose” which
precedes action is sometimes proposed as a current surrogate for
future events. Men who set nets “know why they are doing so,” and
something of the same sort may have produced the spider’s webspinning behavior which then became subject to natural selection.
But men behave because of operant reinforcement even though
they cannot “state their purpose”; and, when they can, they may
simply be describing their behavior and the contingencies
responsible for its strength. Self-knowledge is at best a by-product
of contingencies; it is not a cause of the behavior generated by
them. Even if we could discover a spider’s felt intention or sense of
purpose, we could not offer it as a cause of the behavior.
Both phylogenic and ontogenic contingencies may seem to
“build purpose into” an organism. It has been said that one of the
achievements of cybernetics has been to demonstrate that
machines may show purpose. But we must look to the construction

of the machine, as we look to the phylogeny and ontogeny of
behavior, to account for the fact that an ongoing system acts as if
it had a purpose.
Another apparent characteristic in common is “adaptation.” Both
kinds of contingencies change the organism so that it adjusts to its
environment in the sense of behaving in it more effectively. With
respect to phylogenic contingencies, this is what is meant by
natural selection. With respect to ontogeny, it is what is meant by
operant conditioning. Successful responses are selected in both
cases, and the result is adaptation. But the processes of selection
are very different, and we cannot tell from the mere fact that
behavior is adaptive which kind of process has been responsible
for it.
More speciﬁc characteristics of behavior seem to be common
products of phylogenic and ontogenic contingencies. Imitation is
an example. If we deﬁne imitation as behaving in a way which
resembles the observed behavior of another organism, the term will
describe both phylogenic and ontogenic behavior. But important
distinctions need to be made. Phylogenic contingencies are
presumably responsible for well-deﬁned responses released by
similar behavior (or its products) on the part of others. A warning cry
is taken up and passed along by others; one bird in a ﬂock ﬂies off
and the others ﬂy off; one member of a herd starts to run and the
others start to run. A stimulus acting upon only one member of a
group thus quickly affects other members, with plausible phylogenic
advantages.
The parrot displays a different kind of imitative behavior. Its vocal
repertoire is not composed of inherited responses, each of which,
like a warning cry, is released by the sound of a similar response in
others. It acquires its imitative behavior ontogenically, but only
through an apparently inherited capacity to be reinforced by
hearing itself produce familiar sounds. Its responses need not be
released by immediately preceding stimuli (the parrot speaks when
not spoken to); but an echoic stimulus is often effective, and the
response is then a sort of imitation.
A third type of imitative contingency does not presuppose an
inherited tendency to be reinforced by behaving as others behave.
When other organisms are behaving in a given way, similar
behavior is likely to be reinforced, since they would probably not be
behaving in that way if it were not. Quite apart from any instinct of
imitation, we learn to do what others are doing because we are

then likely to receive the reinforcement they are receiving. We must
not overlook distinctions of this sort if we are to use or cope with
imitation in a technology of behavior.
Aggression is another term which conceals differences in
provenance. Inherited repertoires of aggressive responses are
elicited or released by speciﬁc stimuli. Azrin, for example, has
studied the stereotyped, mutually aggressive behavior evoked
when two organisms receive brief electric shocks. But he and his
associates have also demonstrated that the opportunity to engage
in such behavior functions as a reinforcer and, as such, may be
used to shape an indeﬁnite number of “aggressive” operants of
arbitrary topographies (8). Evidence of damage to others may be
reinforcing for phylogenic reasons because it is associated with
competitive survival. Competition in the current environment may
make it reinforcing for ontogenic reasons. To deal successfully with
any speciﬁc aggressive act we must respect its provenance.
(Emotional responses, the bodily changes we feel when we are
aggressive, like sexual modesty or aversion to incest, may
conceivably be the same whether of phylogenic or ontogenic
origin; the importance of the distinction is not thereby reduced.)
Konrad Lorenz’s recent book On Aggression (94) could be
seriously misleading if it diverts our attention from relevant
manipulable variables in the current environment to phylogenic
contingencies which, in their sheer remoteness, encourage a
nothing-can-be-done-about-it attitude.
The concept of territoriality also often conceals basic differences.
Relatively stereotyped behavior displayed in defending a territory,
as a special case of phylogenic aggression, has presumably been
generated by contingencies involving food supplies, breeding,
population density, and so on. But cleared territory, associated with
these and other advantages, becomes a conditioned reinforcer
and as such generates behavior much more speciﬁcally adapted to
clearing a given territory. Territorial behavior may also be primarily
ontogenic. Whether the territory defended is as small as a spot on
a crowded beach or as large as a sphere of inﬂuence in
international politics, we shall not get far in analyzing the behavior
if we recognize nothing more than “a primary passion for a place of
one’s own” (5) or insist that “animal behavior provides prototypes of
the lust for political power” (41).
Several other concepts involving social structure also neglect

important distinctions. A hierarchical pecking order is inevitable if
the members of a group differ with respect to aggressive behavior
in any of the forms just mentioned. There are therefore several
kinds of pecking orders, differing in their provenances. Some
dominant and submissive behaviors are presumably phylogenic
stereotypes; the underdog turns on its back to escape further
attack, but it does not follow that the vassal prostrating himself
before king or priest is behaving for the same reasons. The
ontogenic contingencies which shape the organization of a large
company or governmental administration show little in common with
the phylogenic contingencies responsible for the hierarchy in the
poultry yard. Some forms of human society may resemble the
anthill or beehive, but not because they exemplify the same
behavioral processes (3).
Basic differences between phylogenic and ontogenic
contingencies are particularly neglected in theories of
communication. In the inherited signal systems of animals the
behavior of a “speaker” furthers the survival of the species when it
affects a “listener.” The distress call of a chick evokes appropriate
behavior in the hen; mating calls and displays evoke appropriate
responses in the opposite sex; and so on. De Laguna (39) has
suggested that animal calls could be classiﬁed as declarations,
commands, predictions, and so on, and Sebeok (121) has recently
attempted a similar synthesis in modern linguistic terms, arguing for
the importance of a science of zoosemiotics.
The phylogenic and ontogenic contingencies leading,
respectively, to instinctive signal systems and to verbal behavior
are quite different. One is not an early version of the other. Cries,
displays, and other forms of communication arising from phylogenic
contingencies are particularly insensitive to operant reinforcement.
Like phylogenic repertories in general, they are restricted to
situations which elicit or release them and hence lack the variety
and ﬂexibility which favor operant conditioning. Vocal responses
which at least closely resemble instinctive cries have been
conditioned, but much less easily than responses using other parts
of the skeletal nervous system. The vocal responses in the human
child which are so easily shaped by operant reinforcement are not
controlled by speciﬁc releasers. It was the development of an
undifferentiated vocal repertoire which brought a new and
important system of behavior within range of operant reinforcement
through the mediation of other organisms (141).

Many efforts have been made to represent the products of both
sets of contingencies in a single formulation. An utterance,
gesture, or display, whether phylogenic or ontogenic, is said to
have a referent which is its meaning, the referent or meaning being
inferred by a listener. Information theory offers a more elaborate
version: the communicating organism selects a message from the
environment, reads out relevant information from storage, encodes
the message, and emits it; the receiving organism decodes the
message, relates it to other stored information, and acts upon it
effectively. All these activities, together with the storage of material,
may be either phylogenic or ontogenic. The principal terms in such
analyses (input, output, sign, referent, and so on) are objective
enough, but they do not adequately describe the actual behavior
of the speaker or the behavior of the listener as he responds to the
speaker. The important differences between phylogenic and
ontogenic contingencies must be taken into account in an
adequate analysis. It is not true, as Sebeok contends, that “any
viable hypothesis about the origin and nature of language will have
to incorporate the ﬁndings of zoosemiotics.” Just as we can
analyze and teach imitative behavior without analyzing the
phylogenic contingencies responsible for animal mimicry, or study
and construct human social systems without analyzing the
phylogenic contingencies which lead to the social life of insects, so
we can analyze the verbal behavior of man without taking into
account the signal systems of other species.
Purpose, adaptation, imitation, aggression, territoriality, social
structure, and communication—concepts of this sort have, at ﬁrst
sight, an engaging generality. They appear to be useful in
describing both ontogenic and phylogenic behavior and to identify
important common properties. Their very generality limits their
usefulness, however. A more speciﬁc analysis is needed if we are
to deal effectively with the two kinds of contingencies and their
products.

Note 7.1

Nature or nurture?

The basic issue is not whether behavior is instinctive or learned, as
if these adjectives described essences, but whether we have
correctly identiﬁed the variables responsible for the provenance of
behavior as well as those currently in control. Early behaviorists,

impressed by the importance of newly discovered environmental
variables, found it particularly reinforcing to explain what appeared
to be an instinct by showing that it could have been learned, just
as ethologists have found it reinforcing to show that behavior
attributed to the environment is still exhibited when environmental
variables have been ruled out. The important issue is empirical:
what are the relevant variables?
Whether we can plausibly extrapolate from one species to
another is also a question about controlling variables. The
ethologist is likely to emphasize differences among species and to
object to arguing from pigeons to men, but the environmentalist
may object in the same way to the cross-species generalizations of
ethologists. If pigeons are not people, neither are graylag geese or
apes. To take an important current problem as an example—the
population of the world can presumably be kept within bounds
without famine, pestilence, or war only if cultural practices
associated with procreation can be changed with the aid of
education, medicine, and law. It is also possible that man shows or
will show when seriously overcrowded a population-limiting instinct,
as certain other species appear to do. The question is not whether
human procreative behavior is primarily instinctive or learned, or
whether the behavior of other species is relevant, but whether the
behavior can be controlled through accessible variables.
Extrapolation from one species to another is often felt to be more
secure when the species are closely related, but contingencies of
survival do not always respect taxonomic classiﬁcations. Recent
work by Harlow and others on the behavior of infant monkeys is
said to be particularly signiﬁcant for human behavior because
monkeys are primates; but so far as a behavioral repertoire is
concerned, the human infant is much closer to a kitten or puppy
than to an arboreal monkey. The kinship is not in the line of
descent, but in the contingencies of survival. The monkey is more
likely to survive if infants cling to their mothers, scream and run if
left alone, and run to their mothers when frightened. The human
baby cannot do much of this, and if it could, the behavior would
have no great survival value in a species in which the mother
leaves the young while foraging since highly excitable behavior in
the infant would attract predators. Mild activity in hunger or physical
distress and clinging and sucking when hungry are no doubt
important for the human infant, but they lack the extremity of the
responses of the infant monkey.

An emphasis on form or structure obscures the difference
between inherited and acquired behavior because it means a
neglect of the controlling variables in terms of which a distinction
can be made. To deﬁne imitation simply as behaving as someone
else is behaving is to mention stimuli and responses but to neglect
the consequences, and it is the consequences which are either
phylogenic or ontogenic. To deﬁne aggression as behavior which
damages others is to fail to make the distinction for the same
reasons.
Our increasing knowledge of controlling variables, both
phylogenic and ontogenic, has already resolved some traditional
issues. Not so long ago it might have been possible to debate
whether a pigeon somehow or other learns to build its nest, but
now that we have examined the behavior of pigeons under a fairly
wide range of contingencies, we can be sure that it does not. A
program which would shape the behavior of building a nest, with
no contribution whatsoever from genetic endowment, can almost
certainly not be arranged. If the pigeon had an inherited capacity
to be reinforced by various stages in the construction of a nest, the
assignment would be less difﬁcult, but still staggering. It is quite out
of the question to suppose that the necessary environmental
contingencies arise by accident whenever a pigeon builds a nest.
At the same time increasing information about how pigeons do
build nests clarifies the phylogenic account.
Behavior which is not characteristic of all members of a species
but recurs in more or less the same pattern in a few is likely to be
said to show an underlying nature characteristic of the species.
Thus, de Sade is said to have shown that man’s “true instincts
were to steal, rape, and murder,” even though only a small
percentage of men may do these things, at least in de Sade’s
culture. Without a culture or under extreme provocation, all men
may be capable of doing so, but the extremity of the examples
offered
by
de
Sade
suggests
extreme environmental
circumstances. As we have seen, a schedule of sexual
reinforcement may be naturally “stretched” as the amount of
behavior required for reinforcement increases with satiation and, on
a different time scale, with age.

Note 7.2

Species-specific behavior

A complete inventory of the genetic behavioral endowment of a
given species would cover all aspects of its behavior in all possible
environments, including
(1) Skeletal and autonomic reﬂexes to all possible eliciting stimuli,
including emotional responses under the most extreme
provocation.
(2) All instinctive responses evoked by identiﬁable releasers in all
possible settings, all necessary materials being available.
(3) All the behaviors which may be shaped and maintained by
various contingencies of reinforcement, since a species is
characterized in part by the positive and negative reinforcers to
which it is sensitive and the kinds of topography which are within
reach. For example, it is much harder to bring a pigeon under
aversive control than a rat, monkey, or man. It is hard to teach a rat
to let go of an object by reinforcing it when it does so. It is difﬁcult
to shape vocal behavior in most species below man, even when
innate responses are common and imitative repertoires easily set
up. The speed, order, and direction in which a repertoire can be
modiﬁed under operant conditioning is also presumably a
characteristic of a species.
(An interesting example of the availability of an unusual
response in a porpoise arose when an effort was made to
demonstrate operant conditioning to daily audiences (115). A
female porpoise was reinforced for a new response each day, and
all previously conditioned responses were allowed to go
unreinforced. Standard responses such as “porpoising,”
“beaching,” and “tail-slapping” made their appearance and were
reinforced, one in each performance. The standard repertoire was
soon exhausted, however, and the porpoise then began to
execute responses which experienced trainers had never seen
before and found hard to name or describe. Certain well-deﬁned
responses appeared which had previously been observed only in
other strains of porpoises. These responses would not have been
included in an inventory of the strain under observation had it not
been for the unusual contingencies which made it highly probable
that all available behavior would appear.)
(4) Behavior exhibited under unusual or conﬂicting sets of
contingencies, particularly those involving punishment. (A
disposition to neurotic or psychotic behavior and the forms taken
by that behavior presumably vary among species.)

(5) Behavior characteristic of all levels of deprivation—extreme
hunger or thirst as well as the most complete satiation.
The concept of a “natural environment” is appealing in part
because it permits us to neglect behavior in other environments as
if it were not characteristic of the species. Ethologists tend to show
no interest, for example, in behavior under laboratory conditions or
after domestication. Yet everything is the product of natural
processes. We make a useful distinction between animals and men
although we know that men are animals, we distinguish the natural
from the social sciences although we know that society is natural,
and we distinguish between natural and synthetic ﬁbers although
we know that the behavior of the chemist is as natural as that of a
silkworm. There is nothing which is essentially human, social, or
synthetic.
The “natural” environment in which the behavior of a species is
studied by ethologists is usually only one of the environments in
which the species is now living. It is signiﬁcant that different natural
environments often generate different behaviors. Kortlandt and his
associates (86) are reported to have found that chimpanzees living
in a rain forest differ greatly (are much less “advanced” or
“humanized”) than plains-dwelling chimpanzees. But which is the
natural environment? Is a chimpanzee learning binary arithmetic in
a laboratory (45) showing chimpanzee or human behavior? The
chimpanzees who “manned” early satellites were conditioned under
complex contingencies of reinforcement, and their behavior was
promptly described as “almost human,” but it was the contingencies
which were almost human.

Note 7.3

Interrelations among phylogenic and ontogenic
variables

Evolution is not appropriately described as a process of trial and
error. A mutation is a trial only to those who insist that evolution
has direction or purpose, and unsuccessful or lethal mutations do
not disappear because they are errors. These terms are likely to
turn up, however, in discussions of the evolution of behavior (rather
than, say, of anatomical features) because of the currency of trialand-error theories of learning. But operant conditioning is not, as
we have seen, a matter of trial and error either.

A behavioral mutation is not simply a new form of response; the
probability that it will be emitted is as important as its topography. A
given topography of sexual behavior may be relevant to survival,
but so is the probability that it will be displayed. Any susceptibility to
reinforcement, positive or negative, has also presumably evolved
by degrees rather than by saltatory changes. If the behavior
reinforced by sexual contact has survival value, an increase in the
power of the reinforcer should have survival value.
The process of operant conditioning has presumably emerged
because of its phylogenic consequences, which must also have
favored any increase in its speed. The extent to which a given kind
of behavior is susceptible to operant reinforcement must also have
been important. The human species took a great step forward
when its vocal musculature, previously concerned with the
production of responses of phylogenic signiﬁcance, came under
operant control, because the social contingencies responsible for
verbal behavior could then begin to operate.
Behavior arising from ontogenic contingencies may make
phylogenic contingencies more or less effective. Ontogenic
behavior may permit a species to maintain itself in a given
environment for a long time and thus make it possible for
phylogenic contingencies to operate. There is, however, a more
direct contribution. If, through evolutionary selection, a given
response becomes easier and easier to condition as an operant,
then some phylogenic behavior may have had an ontogenic origin.
One of Darwin’s “serviceable associated habits” will serve as an
example. Let us assume that a dog possesses no instinctive
tendency to turn around as it lies down but that lying down in this
way is reinforced as an operant by the production of a more
comfortable bed. If there are no phylogenic advantages,
presumably the readiness with which the response is learned will
not be changed by selection. But phylogenic advantages can be
imagined: such a bed may be freer of vermin, offer improved
visibility with respect to predators or prey, permit quick movement in
an emergency, and so on. Dogs in which the response was most
readily conditioned must have been most likely to survive and
breed. (These and other advantages would increase the dog’s
susceptibility to operant reinforcement in general, but we are here
considering the possibility that a particular response becomes more
likely to be conditioned.) Turning around when lying down may

have become so readily available as an operant that it eventually
appeared without reinforcement. It was then “instinctive.”
Ontogenic contingencies were responsible for the topography of
an inherited response. The argument is rather similar to
Waddington’s (162) suggestion that useful callouses on the breast
of an ostrich, presumably of ontogenic origin, appear before the
egg is hatched because a tendency to form callouses has evolved
to the point at which the environmental variable (friction) is no
longer needed.1
Temporal and intensive properties of behavior can also be traced
to both ontogenic and phylogenic sources. For example,
contingencies of survival and reinforcement both have effects on
the speed with which an organism moves in overtaking prey or
escaping from predators. A house cat, like its undomesticated
relatives, creeps up on its prey slowly and then springs. Relevant
contingencies are both phylogenic and ontogenic: by moving
slowly the cat comes within jumping range and can then jump more
successfully. The stalking pattern is effective because of the
characteristic behavior of the prey. If a species comes fairly
suddenly into contact with prey which is disturbed by quick
movements, the stalking pattern should emerge ﬁrst at the
ontogenic level; but under such conditions, those members of the
species most susceptible to differential reinforcement of slow
responding should survive and breed. The stalking pattern should
then appear more and more quickly, and eventually in the absence
of ontogenic contingencies.
Behavior which is not susceptible to operant reinforcement could
not have evolved in this way. If the pilomotor response of an
enraged cat frightens away its enemies, the disappearance of the
enemy may be reinforcing (it could be used, for example, to shape
the behavior of pressing a lever), but it is quite unlikely that the
consequence has any reinforcing effect on the pilomotor response.
It is therefore unlikely that the instinctive behavior had an
ontogenic origin.
There are other kinds of interactions among the two kinds of
contingencies. Phylogeny comes ﬁrst and the priority is often
emphasized by ethologists, sometimes with the implication that
phylogenic problems must be solved before ontogenic
contingencies can be studied. Ontogenic changes in behavior
affect phylogenic contingencies. A given species does not, as is

often said, choose between instinct and intelligence. As soon as a
species becomes subject to ontogenic contingencies, phylogenic
contingencies become less cogent, for the species can survive with
a less adequate phylogenic repertoire. Man did not “choose
intelligence over instinct”; he simply developed a sensitivity to
ontogenic contingencies which made phylogenic contingencies
and their products less important. The phylogenic contingencies
still exist but exert less of an effect. The change may have serious
consequences. It has often been pointed out, for example, that
the ontogenic cultural practices of medicine and sanitation have
overruled phylogenic contingencies which would normally maintain
or improve the health of the species. The species may suffer when
the culture no longer maintains medical and sanitary practices, or
when new diseases arise against which only a natural resistance is
a defense.
Some phylogenic contingencies must be effective before
ontogenic
contingencies
can
operate.
The
relatively
undifferentiated behavior from which operants are selected is
presumably a phylogenic product; a large undifferentiated
repertoire may have been selected because it made ontogenic
contingencies effective. The power of reinforcers must have arisen
for similar reasons. It is tempting to say that food is reinforcing
because it reduces hunger (Chapter 3), but food in the mouth is
reinforcing when not swallowed or ingested, and man and other
species eat when not hungry. The capacity to be reinforced by
food must be traced to natural selection. Behavior reinforced with
food has survival value mainly when an organism is hungry, and
organisms which have developed the capacity to be active in
getting food only when deprived of food have an advantage in
being less often needlessly active. A similar variation in the
strength of sexual behavior (in most mammals, though not in man)
is more obviously of phylogenic origin. In a great many species the
male is active sexually only when the behavior is likely to lead to
procreation. The bitch in heat emits odors which greatly strengthen
sexual behavior in the male dog, and she then cooperates in
copulation. It might be argued that this shows a contemporary
purpose, as implied in drive-reduction theories: sexual behavior is
strong because it leads to fertilization. A plausible connection,
however, is to be found in the phylogenic contingencies: under
normal contingencies of survival a constantly active sexual
behavior when ovulation is not frequent would displace behavior

important for survival in other ways. Man appears to be one of a
few species which can afford sexual behavior unrelated to
ovulation.
The distinction between the inheritance of behavior of speciﬁed
topography and the inheritance of the capacity to be reinforced by
given consequences is relevant not only to imprinting but to the
kind of fact offered in support of the concept of a racial
unconscious. If archetypal patterns of behavior seem to recur
without transmission via the environment, it may be because they
are independently shaped by recurring contingencies to which
racial sensitivities to reinforcement are relevant. The young boy
discovering masturbation by himself may seem to be recalling a
rhythmic topography exhibited by his ancestors (contributing
perhaps to the topography of music and the dance); but the
topography may be shaped simply by the reinforcing effects of
certain contacts and movements, the capacity to be thus reinforced
being possibly all that is inherited.
Common feelings. Inherited behavior may differ from learned in
the way we feel about it. What we feel are events in, or states of,
our body. When we behave primarily to avoid punishment, we may
feel responses conditioned by punishing stimuli. We feel them as
shame, guilt, or sin, depending upon the source of the
punishment. If a culture punishes incestuous behavior, then any
move made toward sexual contact with a close relative will
presumably generate conditioned responses which are felt as
anxiety. Phylogenic contingencies may induce a man to stay away
from incestuous contacts either by providing an innate topography
from which such contacts are missing, or by imparting a capacity to
be automatically punished by them (when they give rise to an
“instinctive abhorrence”). If incestuous contacts are automatically
punishing for phylogenic reasons, we may look for a difference in
the feelings associated with the avoidance of conditioned and
unconditioned aversive stimuli. If the feelings differ, we should be
able to decide whether incest is a taboo resulting from an
instinctive abhorrence or an abhorrence resulting from a taboo.
Several classical issues which have to do with controlling
variables are often stated in terms of feelings. When phylogenic
contingencies have generated not only behavior having a speciﬁc
topography but the capacity to be reinforced by the natural

consequences of that behavior, the obvious redundancy may
operate as a safety device. It may well be true that mothers
“instinctively” nurse their young and are at the same time reinforced
when they do so through an inherited sensitivity. The relevance of
“pleasurable sensations” in accounting for instinctive behavior is an
old theme. Cabanis (33) argued for the importance of the
reinforcement. He also reported a curious practice in which a capon
was plucked le ventre, rubbed with nettles and vinager, and set on
eggs. The eggs were said to give relief from the irritation so that
the capon continued to set on them and hatch them. By creating a
strong aversive stimulus, from which the capon could escape by
setting on eggs, the farmers who resorted to this practice created
synthetic hens. Cabanis says that the capon continued to care for
the hatched chicks, although the behavior could scarcely have
been shaped or maintained through the aversive control. Perhaps
all domestic chickens, male and female, possess the behavior in
some strength (compare the example of the porpoise above).
The fact that an operant shaped by virtue of an inherited
susceptibility to reinforcement may duplicate an instinct arising from
the same phylogenic contingencies ﬁgured prominently in
Darwinian discussions of purpose. There seemed to be an
advantage in replacing remote and nearly inscrutable
contingencies of survival with ontogenic contingencies where
purpose referred to accessible and identiﬁable consequences (see
page 106). Samuel Butler (31) argued that a hen felt relief after
laying an egg and insisted that a poet felt the same kind of relief
after writing a poem. We are still likely to say that a man eats to get
relief from hunger pangs, and the English language has the idiom
of “relieving oneself” to refer to defecation and urination. The
argument is close to a theory of reinforcement as drive reduction.
Confusion arises from the fact that food is both reinforcing and
satiating. The connection is phylogenic: a nourishing substance
becomes a reinforcer, so that any behavior leading to its ingestion
is likely to be strengthened.
The sucking responses of a newborn infant are probably the
best documented instinctive behavior in man. That the tactual and
gustatory stimuli inevitably associated with sucking are also
reinforcing is a supplementary fact rather than an explanation. The
phylogenic contingencies have generated redundant mechanisms.

Note 7.4

Aggression

Aggression is sometimes deﬁned as behavior which expresses
feelings of hostility or hate, satisﬁes a need to hurt, is meant or
intended to hurt, or can be traced to aggressive instincts or habits.
These deﬁnitions remain incomplete until we have deﬁned feelings,
needs, meanings, intentions, instincts, and habits. Can aggressive
behavior be defined in a better way?
Behavior is not aggressive simply because of its topography.
Some forms of response, such as baring the teeth or biting, often
turn out to be aggressive (as deﬁned below), but this is not always
true. Controlling variables must be speciﬁed, among them the
variables toward which terms like meaning, need, and instinct point.
One variable—the effect of the behavior—is important in traditional
usage: behavior is aggressive if it harms others (or threatens to do
so). A useful distinction may be drawn between phylogenic and
ontogenic effects.
Phylogenic aggression. Tooth-and-claw competition was once
the archetypal pattern of natural selection. What evolved was not
only efﬁcient teeth and claws but the reﬂexes and released
behaviors in which they played a part. Classical examples with
obvious survival value include the aggression of carnivores toward
their prey, sexual competition between male and male (the
aggression of male against female—in rape—is said to be conﬁned
to the human species), a mother’s defense of her young, and the
protection of a supply of food (the otherwise friendly dog snaps at
anyone who tries to take away his bone). These speciﬁc
contingencies of survival may have given rise to a more general
controlling relation. Painful stimuli are associated with combat quite
apart from the speciﬁc contingencies under which combat makes
for survival, and they have come to release aggressive behavior on
a great variety of occasions (8). Physical restraint and the absence
of characteristic reinforcement (“frustration”) are also effective,
presumably for similar reasons.
Aggressive behavior of phylogenic origin is accompanied by
autonomic responses which contribute to survival at least to the
extent that they support vigorous activity. These responses are a
major part of what is felt in aggression. Distinctions among
jealousy, anger, rage, hatred, and so on, suggest speciﬁc
phylogenic contingencies. Whether these are different autonomic

patterns, or whether what is felt includes more than autonomic
behavior, need not be decided here. (The relation of predator to
prey is usually regarded as a special case. It may not give rise to
“feelings of aggression” although other phylogenic variables may
operate in the pursuit or killing of prey.) Many of the dynamic
properties of phylogenic aggression remain to be analyzed: eliciting
or releasing stimuli become more effective, either in evoking
behavior or in arousing feelings, when repeated or when combined
with other stimuli having the same effect; a period of active
aggression may be followed by a period of quiescence in a kind of
satiation which is not simply fatigue; and so on.
Ontogenic aggression. “Damage to others” may act as a
reinforcer giving rise to a kind of aggressive behavior under the
control of ontogenic variables. When we hurt someone by insulting
him, cursing him, or telling him bad news, the topography of our
behavior is determined by contingencies arranged by a verbal
community. The contingencies have not prevailed long enough to
permit any extensive natural selection of the behavior. When we
hurt someone by using recently invented weapons, our behavior is
also obviously acquired rather than inherited.
It is not enough to deﬁne ontogenic aggressive behavior simply
by saying that it damages others. What are the dimensions of
“damage”? Presumably the actual stimuli which reinforce
aggressive action are to be found in the behavior of the recipient
as he weeps, cries out, cringes, ﬂees, or gives other signs that he
has been hurt. (Counteraggression may be among these
behaviors; an aggressive person is reinforced by “getting a rise” out
of his opponent.) Aggressive behavior showing a wide range of
topographies may be reinforced by these consequences.
Signs of damage also reinforce behavior which is not itself
damaging. Thus, they reinforce the spectator at a wrestling or
boxing match or professional football game, and he pays
admission and watches the match or game because of them. (They
are reinforcing even though he does not “identify himself” with the
participants; but identiﬁcation in such a case is also a form of
aggressive behavior, largely imitative in nature [135].)
Damage to others may be reinforcing for several reasons. It may
function as a conditioned reinforcer because signs of damage
have preceded or coincided with reinforcers which do not otherwise
have anything to do with aggression. Effective damage to a sexual

competitor becomes reinforcing (if it has not been made so by
phylogenic contingencies) when it is followed by unchallenged
sexual reinforcement. Damage inﬂicted upon a thief becomes
reinforcing when it is followed by the retention or return of
possessions.
We have also to consider the possibility that a capacity to be
reinforced by signs of damage may have evolved under the
phylogenic contingencies which lead to phylogenic aggression.
Individuals should have been selected when they behaved not
only in such a way as to drive off predators or sexual competitors,
but in such a way as to produce any stimuli commonly preceding
these effects, such as the signs of damage associated with
successful combat. Indeed the topography of combative behavior
should be more quickly shaped and maintained by immediate signs
of damage than by eventual success, as the details of a boxer’s
style are more effectively shaped by the immediate consequences
of particular blows than by the final knockout.
Among the reinforcers which shape ontogenic aggression are
any conditions which provide the opportunity to act aggressively,
either phylogenically or ontogenically. If we are to deﬁne
aggression in terms of its consequences, we should have to
include the behavior of a pigeon pecking a key when the
reinforcement is access to another pigeon which can be attacked.
The reinforcing effect varies with the incitement, either phylogenic
or ontogenic. The probability that the pigeon will peck the key
varies with the probability that it will attack another pigeon when a
pigeon is already present.
The feelings associated with ontogenic aggression will depend
mainly upon the autonomic behavior elicited by the same
contingencies. If damage to others is reinforcing simply because it
has commonly been followed by such a reinforcer as food, the
aggression to which it gives rise may be as “cold” as other forms of
food-getting behavior. An innate capacity to be reinforced by
damage to others traceable to phylogenic contingencies may give
rise to the autonomic pattern associated with phylogenic
aggression. To say that we are aggressive because we “take
pleasure in hurting” adds no more to the analysis than to say that
we eat because we take pleasure in eating. Both expressions
simply indicate kinds of reinforcers.
Interactions and comparisons. A given instance of aggression

can generally be traced to both phylogenic and ontogenic
contingencies, since both kinds of variables are generally operative
upon a given occasion. The fact that phylogenic contingencies
have contributed to the capacity to be reinforced by ontogenic
evidences of damage makes the interrelation particularly confusing.
It is still worthwhile to look for the effective variables, particularly
when an effort is made either to strengthen or weaken aggressive
behavior.
The intensity of instinctive aggressive behavior presumably varies
roughly with the incitement, at least according to the contingencies
originally involved in its selection. If a mother’s defense of her
young in some modern environment seems exaggerated, we must
turn to the original phylogenic contingencies for an explanation.
The frequency and energy of ontogenic aggression may range
more widely. An intermittent schedule of reinforcement may build a
high probability of aggressive behavior even though the net
damage is slight. There are natural programming systems having
this effect. A man may spend much of his time in the mild
aggression called complaining or nagging even though he only
rarely evokes signs of damage, such as a burst of anger. He may
be programmed into such a condition as the behavior of his listener
slowly adapts or extinguishes. Other schedules of differential
reinforcement build up violent forms of aggression. Personal
systems of attack and counterattack escalate as readily as
international if more and more violent behavior is needed to effect
damage (to offset improved defenses or to achieve a net positive
damage by exceeding the damage done by others). A set of social
contingencies in which aggressive behavior escalates has been
described elsewhere (135, p. 309); when two or more people are
exchanging aggressive blows, the aversive stimulation of a blow
received may evoke a harder blow in return.
Aggressive behavior which does not seem commensurate with its
consequences is often puzzling. Killing is called “senseless” when
relevant variables can not be identiﬁed. But aggression is never
senseless in the sense of uncaused; we have simply overlooked
either a current variable or a history of reinforcement.
Aggression might be deﬁned as behavior which affects other
organisms either phylogenically as a threat to their survival or
ontogenically as a negative reinforcer. Both effects have
opposites: behavior may promote the survival of others and

positively reinforce them. There seems to be no antonym for
aggression which covers behavior of both phylogenic and
ontogenic origin. “Affection” is close; but it refers to feelings rather
than to behavior or its consequences, as hatred refers to the
emotional accompaniments of aggression. The phylogenic
opposite of aggression has survival value with respect to a different
object: survival is furthered by aggression toward competitors and
by affection toward members of the same species. Maternal care,
foraging for and protecting a mate or mates, and sexual behavior
are examples of the latter. The consequences are reinforcing either
because of an innate capacity to be reinforced by caring for others
or because behavior which positively reinforces others is followed
by other kinds of positive reinforcement. Both aggression and
affection show a kind of reciprocity. We tend to act aggressively
toward those who act aggressively toward us and to be
affectionate toward those who show us affection.
A surprising number of the antonyms of aggression have
aversive overtones. “Care,” “solicitude,” and “concern” all suggest
anxiety lest the objects of affection be harmed, possibly coupled
with a fear that they will no longer show affection. It has often been
pointed out that love is close to hatred and that affection and
aggression seem to be combined in certain forms of sadistic
behavior. This has nothing to do with the essence of love or hatred
or with anything in common in the accompanying feelings. It is the
consequences which are close to one another and only then
because both kinds of effects may be mediated by one person.
Affectionate behavior, particularly when built up by intermittent
reinforcement, may have strong aversive consequences which in
turn evoke aggressive behavior toward the object of affection.
A tendency to kill members of the same species could promote
the survival of the species. There may be advantages in limiting a
population, in selecting or training especially good ﬁghters who
become valuable to the species when they turn on its enemies,
and even in cannibalism, in an extreme emergency, as a way of
preserving at least a few members. In general, however,
intraspecies aggression is rare.
The tyger preys not on the tyger brood;
Man only is the common foe of man (54).
This is sometimes explained by saying that aggression toward

members of one’s own species is opposed by an instinctive
inhibition, except in men. The concept of inhibition is not needed.
We do not say that a carnivore refrains from eating vegetables
because of an inhibition; its ingestive behavior is evoked only by
certain kinds of stimuli. Even if it were true that tigers kill all animals
except tigers, we should not need to hypothesize that tiger-killing is
inhibited by a special mechanism. Contingencies of survival will
explain a discrimination among kinds of prey.
Ontogenic intraspecies aggression also threatens the species.
Cultural practices which minimize aggression against other
members of a group, such as taboos against killing members of
one’s own family, tribe, or nation (note the deﬁnition of murder),
obviously strengthen the group. The cultural sanctions are usually
aversive: intragroup aggression is suppressed by punishment or
the threat of punishment. This is inhibition in the original meaning
of the word: the aggression is forbidden or interdicted. If we do not
kill members of our own group, it is not because of some inner
inhibition but because of identifiable variables in our culture.
Suicide. It is difﬁcult to see how aggressive action toward oneself
could have survival value, particularly in the ultimate form of
suicide. If suicidal behavior arose as a mutation, it should quickly
have eliminated itself. Phylogenic contingencies in which the death
of an individual beneﬁts the species would probably favor the
selection of behavior in which other members do the killing. (If
intraspecies killing threatens the survival of the species, there is a
remote chance that suicide would have survival value in making
such behavior less probable.) Some forms of instinctive behavior
may be damaging and possibly lead to the death of those who
display them when the damage is associated with consequences
having strong survival value. A difficult but necessary migration may
provide the necessary conditions. So may a change of
environment if behavior which once had survival value becomes
damaging or lethal in a new setting.
Ontogenic contingencies are more likely to generate behavior
which damages the behaver. Behavior which damages others is
often damaging to the behaver in the sense that it exposes him to
damage or leads him to accept damage without struggle. We may
come to submit to damaging consequences because of ultimate
positive reinforcement. We take a cold plunge because of the
exhilarating glow which follows, submit to danger because we are

reinforced by subsequent escape, and hurt ourselves so that
others will feel sorry for us and give us attention. We submit to
aversive stimuli in order to escape from stimuli which are even more
aversive: we go to the dentist and submit to his drill to escape from
a toothache. The religious ﬂagellant whips himself to escape from
conditioned aversive stimulation which he feels as guilt or a sense
of sin. Animals can be induced to take a shock if, in doing so, they
are then reinforced positively or negatively, and with careful
programming they will continue to do so even when the shock
becomes intense.
The ethical group arranges contingencies on this pattern if it
gains when an individual inﬂicts damage on himself. Thus, the
group may support a custom of suicide in the old or infirm. A culture
which makes much of personal honor may support the practice of
hara-kiri or induce heroes to expose themselves to necessarily fatal
circumstances. Contingencies arranged by religious systems
support mortiﬁcation and maceration as well as martyrdom. A
philosophy of “acceptance of life” recommends submission to
aversive and potentially damaging conditions.
Accidental damaging consequences presumably do not deﬁne
aggression. Although accidental killing was once punished by
death, it is now recognized that such measures have no deterrent
effect. Nor is the accidental killing of oneself counted as
aggression. The man who runs his motor to keep his parked car
warm or smokes a great many cigarettes or the citizens of a city
who allow the air to be heavily polluted are not, strictly speaking,
committing suicide. Nor is the culture whose practices prove fatal
when the environment changes. Sanitation and medicine have
emerged from ontogenic contingencies having to do with the
avoidance of ill health and death, but it is conceivable that a group
which maximize sanitation and medicine may be most vulnerable to
a new virus, such as might arise from a mutation or come from
some other part of the universe. Practices which up to now have
had survival value, although of ontogenic origin, would then prove
to have been lethal. Escalation of military power under ontogenic
contingencies which seem to favor survival has frequently led to
the destruction of civilizations and in the age of nuclear power may
lead to the destruction of life on earth.
Death instinct. The fact that so much human behavior leads to
death has suggested that man possesses a death instinct. There

are many different kinds of phylogenic and ontogenic
contingencies having this effect, however, and we are not likely to
understand them or be able to do much about them if our attention
is diverted from effective variables to a ﬁctional cause. Men do
behave in ways which are often damaging and even fatal to
themselves and others, but a death instinct implies phylogenic
contingencies in which this would have survival value. The
ontogenic contingencies are much more plausible and
conspicuous, and even there the contingencies involve more than
damage or death.
The environmental solution. The four solutions to the problem of
aggression discussed in Chapter 3 deserve further comment. The
sybaritic solution is to design relatively harmless ways in which
people can be aggressive: a man beats another at tennis or chess
rather than with a stick; he reads sadistic literature, sees sadistic
movies, and watches sadistic sports. These practices probably
reinforce aggression rather than “drain it off,” unless the
preoccupation with harmless forms leaves no time for harmful. To
suppress aggression by punishment in the “puritan” solution is
simply to shift the role of the aggressor. A chemical solution, as we
have noted, may exist in the form of tranquilizers.
The environmental solution becomes more plausible the more we
know about the contingencies. Phylogenic aggression may be
minimized by minimizing eliciting and releasing stimuli. Behavior
acquired because of an inherited tendency to be reinforced by
damage to others can be minimized by breaking up the
contingencies—by creating a world in which very little behavior
causes the kinds of damage which are reinforcing. We can avoid
making damage-to-others a conditioned reinforcer by making sure
that other reinforcements are not contingent upon behavior which
damages. (To put it roughly, people who get what they want
without hurting others are less likely to be reinforced by hurting
others.) In short, we can solve the problem of aggression by
building a world in which damage to others has no survival value
and, for that or other reasons, never functions as a reinforcer. It will
necessarily be a world in which non-aggressive behaviors are
abundantly reinforced on effective schedules in other ways.

Note 7.5

A possible example of programmed phylogenic

contingencies
The hypothesis of continental drift, which has recently received
surprising conﬁrmation, may explain certain cases of complex
migratory behavior which are otherwise quite puzzling. Both
European and American eels, for example, when ready to breed,
leave their freshwater environments and journey to overlapping
deep-sea breeding grounds in the middle Atlantic. The adults die
there, but the young return to the appropriate continents. It is
difﬁcult to imagine that this extremely complex pattern in the
behavior of both parents and offspring could have arisen in its
present form through random mutations, selected by the survival of
individuals possessing appropriate behavior. If we assume,
however, that Europe and North America were once contiguous
and that they moved only very slowly apart, the ﬁrst journeys of the
eels, or of those earlier forms which evolved as eels, could have
been quite short. The present extreme behavior would have been
gradually “shaped” through survival as the phylogenic
contingencies changed. Each year only a slight extension of
behavior would be demanded—possibly only a matter of inches—
and the new contingencies could be met by most members of the
species. Just as an animal with little or no innate tendency to home
can be trained by releasing it at slowly increasing distances, so
early forms of eels were “trained” by phylogenic contingencies as
the distances to be traversed were extended by continental drift.
This would help to explain the fact that the breeding grounds of
European and American eels are close together or overlap.
The behavior of salmon in the North Atlantic may be the result of
a similar program of phylogenic contingencies.1

III

A CRITIQUE OF ALTERNATIVE EXPLANATIONS OF
BEHAVIOR

8

Behaviorism at fifty

Behaviorism, with an accent on the last syllable, is not the scientiﬁc
study of behavior but a philosophy of science concerned with the
subject matter and methods of psychology. If psychology is a
science of mental life—of the mind, of conscious experience—then
it must develop and defend a special methodology, which it has
not yet done successfully. If it is, on the other hand, a science of
the behavior of organisms, human or otherwise, then it is part of
biology, a natural science for which tested and highly successful
methods are available. The basic issue is not the nature of the
stuff of which the world is made or whether it is made of one stuff
or two but rather the dimensions of the things studied by
psychology and the methods relevant to them.
Mentalistic or psychic explanations of human behavior almost
certainly originated in primitive animism. When a man dreamed of
being at a distant place in spite of incontrovertible evidence that he
had stayed in his bed, it was easy to conclude that some part of
him had actually left his body. A particularly vivid memory or a
hallucination could be explained in the same way. The theory of an
invisible, detachable self eventually proved useful for other
purposes. It seemed to explain unexpected or abnormal episodes,
even to the person behaving in an exceptional way because he
was thus “possessed.” It also served to explain the inexplicable. An
organism as complex as man often seems to behave capriciously.
It is tempting to attribute the visible behavior to another organism
inside—to a little man or homunculus. The wishes of the little man
become the acts of the man observed by his fellows. The inner
idea is put into outer words. Inner feelings ﬁnd outward expression.
The explanation is successful, of course, only so long as the
behavior of the homunculus can be neglected (see Chapter 9).
Primitive origins are not necessarily to be held against an
explanatory principle, but the little man is still with us in relatively
primitive form. He was recently the hero of a television program
called “Gateways to the Mind,” one of a series of educational ﬁlms
sponsored by the Bell Telephone Laboratories and written with the
help of a distinguished panel of scientists. The viewer learned, from
animated cartoons, that when a man’s ﬁnger is pricked, electrical
impulses resembling ﬂashes of lightning run up the afferent nerves

and appear on a television screen in the brain. The little man
wakes up, sees the ﬂashing screen, reaches out, and pulls a lever.
More ﬂashes of lightning go down the nerves to the muscles, which
then contract, as the ﬁnger is pulled away from the threatening
stimulus. The behavior of the homunculus was, of course, not
explained. An explanation would presumably require another ﬁlm.
And it, in turn, another.
The same pattern of explanation is invoked when we are told
that the behavior of a delinquent is the result of a disordered
personality or that the vagaries of a man under analysis are due to
conﬂicts among his superego, ego, and id. Nor can we escape
from the primitive features by breaking the little man into pieces
and dealing with his wishes, cognitions, motives, and so on, bit by
bit. The objection is not that these things are mental but that they
offer no real explanation and stand in the way of a more effective
analysis.
It has been about ﬁfty years since the behavioristic objection to
this practice was ﬁrst clearly stated, and it has been about thirty
years since it has been very much discussed. A whole generation
of psychologists has grown up without really coming into contact
with the issue. Almost all current textbooks compromise: rather than
risk a loss of adoptions, they deﬁne psychology as the science of
behavior and mental life. Meanwhile the older view has continued
to receive strong support from areas in which there has been no
comparable attempt at methodological reform. During this period,
however, an effective experimental science of behavior has
emerged. Much or what it has discovered bears on the basic issue.
A restatement of radical behaviorism would therefore seem to be in
order.
A rough history of the idea is not hard to trace. An occasional
phrase in classic Greek writings which seemed to foreshadow the
point of view need not be taken seriously. We may also pass over
the early bravado of a La Mettrie who could shock the
philosophical bourgeoisie by asserting that man was only a
machine. Nor were those who simply preferred, for practical
reasons, to deal with behavior rather than with less accessible, but
nevertheless acknowledged, mental activities close to what is
meant by behaviorism today.1
The entering wedge appears to have been Darwin’s
preoccupation with the continuity of species. In supporting the

theory of evolution, it was important to show that man was not
essentially different from the lower animals—that every human
characteristic, including consciousness and reasoning powers,
could be found in other species. Naturalists like Romanes began to
collect stories which seemed to show that dogs, cats, elephants,
and many other species were conscious and showed signs of
reasoning. It was Lloyd Morgan, of course, who questioned this
evidence with his Canon of Parsimony. Were there not other ways
of accounting for what looked like signs of consciousness or
rational powers? Thorndike’s experiments at the end of the
nineteenth century were in this vein. He showed that the behavior
of a cat in escaping from a puzzle-box might seem to show
reasoning but could be explained instead as the result of simpler
processes. Thorndike remained a mentalist, but he greatly
advanced the objective study of behavior which had been
attributed to mental processes.
The next step was inevitable: if evidence of consciousness and
reasoning could be explained in other ways in animals, why not
also in man? And if this was the case, what became of psychology
as a science of mental life? It was John B. Watson who made the
ﬁrst clear, if rather noisy, proposal that psychology should be
regarded simply as a science of behavior. He was not in a very
good position to defend it. He had little scientiﬁc material to use in
his reconstruction. He was forced to pad his textbook with
discussions of the physiology of receptor systems and muscles and
with physiological theories which were at the time no more
susceptible to proof than the mentalistic theories they were
intended to replace. A need for “mediators” of behavior which might
serve as objective alternatives to thought processes led him to
emphasize sub-audible speech. The notion was intriguing,
because one can usually observe oneself thinking in this way, but
it was by no means an adequate or comprehensive explanation.
He tangled with introspective psychologists by denying the
existence of images. He may well have been acting in good faith,
for it has been said that he himself did not have visual imagery; but
his arguments caused unnecessary trouble. The relative
importance of a genetic endowment in explaining behavior proved
to be another disturbing digression.
All this made it easy to lose sight of the central argument—that
behavior which seemed to be the product of mental activity could
be explained in other ways. Moreover, the introspectionists were

prepared to challenge it. As late as 1883 Francis Galton could
write: “Many persons, especially women and intelligent children,
take pleasure in introspection, and strive their very best to explain
their mental processes” (51). But introspection was already being
taken seriously. The concept of a science of mind in which mental
events obeyed mental laws had led to the development of
psychophysical methods and to the accumulation of facts which
seemed to bar the extension of the principle of parsimony. What
might hold for animals did not hold for men because men could see
their mental processes.
Curiously enough, part of the answer was supplied by the
psychoanalysts, who insisted that, although a man might be able
to see some of his mental life, he could not see all of it. The kind of
thoughts Freud called “unconscious” took place without the
knowledge of the thinker. From an association, verbal slip, or
dream it could be shown that a person must have responded to a
passing stimulus, although he could not tell you that he had done
so. More complex thought processes, including problem solving
and verbal play, could also go on without the thinker’s knowledge.
Freud had devised, and never abandoned faith in, one of the most
elaborate mental apparatuses of all time. He nevertheless
contributed to the behavioristic argument by showing that mental
activity did not, at least, require consciousness. His proofs that
thinking had occurred without introspective recognition were,
indeed, clearly in the spirit of Lloyd Morgan. They were operational
analyses of mental life—even though, for Freud, only the
unconscious part of it. Experimental evidence pointing in the same
direction soon began to accumulate.
But that was not the whole answer. What about the part of
mental life which a man can see? It is a difﬁcult question, no matter
what one’s point of view, partly because it raises the question of
what seeing means and partly because the events seen are
private. The fact of privacy cannot, of course, be questioned. Each
person is in special contact with a small part of the universe
enclosed within his own skin. To take a noncontroversial example,
he is uniquely subject to certain kinds of proprioceptive and
interoceptive stimulation. Though two people may in some sense
be said to see the same light or hear the same sound, they cannot
feel the same distention of a bile duct or the same bruised muscle.
(When privacy is invaded with scientiﬁc instruments, the form of

stimulation is changed; the scales read by the scientist are not the
private events themselves.)
Mentalistic psychologists insist that there are other kinds of
events which are uniquely accessible to the owner of the skin
within which they occur but which lack the physical dimensions of
proprioceptive or interoceptive stimuli. They are as different from
physical events as colors are from wave lengths of light. There are
even better reasons, therefore, why two people cannot suffer each
other’s toothaches, recall each other’s memories, or share each
other’s happinesses. The importance assigned to this kind of world
varies. For some, it is the only world there is. For others, it is the
only part of the world which can be directly known. For still others, it
is a special part of what can be known. In any case, the problem of
how one knows about the subjective world of another must be
faced. Apart from the question of what “knowing” means, the
problem is one of accessibility.

Public and private events
One solution, often regarded as behavioristic, is to grant the
distinction between public and private events and rule the latter out
of scientiﬁc consideration. This is a congenial solution for those to
whom scientiﬁc truth is a matter of convention or agreement among
observers. It is essentially the line taken by logical positivism and
physical operationism. Hogben (69) has recently redeﬁned
“behaviorist” in this spirit. The subtitle of his Statistical Theory is “an
examination of the contemporary crises in statistical theory from a
behaviorist viewpoint,” and this is amplified in the following way:
The behaviourist, as I here use the term, does not deny the convenience of classifying
processes as mental or material. He recognizes the distinction between personality and
corpse: but he has not yet had the privilege of attending an identity parade in which human
minds without bodies are by common recognition distinguishable from living human bodies
without minds. Till then, he is content to discuss probability in the vocabulary of events,
including audible or visibly recorded assertions of human beings as such….

The behavioristic position, so deﬁned, is simply that of the publicist
and “has no concern with structure and mechanism.”
The point of view is often called operational, and it is signiﬁcant
that P. W. Bridgman’s physical operationism could not save him
from an extreme solipsism even within physical science itself.
Though he insisted that he was not a solipsist, he was never able

to reconcile seemingly public physical knowledge with the private
world of the scientist (27, 28). Applied to psychological problems,
operationism has been no more successful. We may recognize the
restrictions imposed by the operations through which we can know
of the existence of properties of subjective events, but the
operations cannot be identiﬁed with the events themselves. S. S.
Stevens has applied Bridgman’s principle to psychology, not to
decide whether subjective events exist, but to determine the extent
to which we can deal with them scientifically (154).
Behaviorists have, from time to time, examined the problem of
privacy, and some of them have excluded so-called sensations,
images, thought processes, and so on, from their deliberations.
When they have done so not because such things do not exist but
because they are out of reach of their methods, the charge is
justiﬁed that they have neglected the facts of consciousness. The
strategy is, however, quite unwise. It is particularly important that a
science of behavior face the problem of privacy. It may do so
without abandoning the basic position of behaviorism. Science
often talks about things it cannot see or measure. When a man
tosses a penny into the air, it must be assumed that he tosses the
earth beneath him downward. It is quite out of the question to see
or measure the effect on the earth, but the effect must be
assumed for the sake of a consistent account. An adequate
science of behavior must consider events taking place within the
skin of the organism, not as physiological mediators of behavior,
but as part of behavior itself. It can deal with these events without
assuming that they have any special nature or must be known in
any special way. The skin is not that important as a boundary.
Private and public events have the same kinds of physical
dimensions.
In the ﬁfty years since a behavioristic philosophy was ﬁrst stated,
facts and principles bearing on the basic issues have steadily
accumulated. For one thing, a scientiﬁc analysis of behavior has
yielded a sort of empirical epistemology. The subject matter of a
science of behavior includes the behavior of scientists and other
knowers. The techniques available to such a science give an
empirical theory of knowledge certain advantages over theories
derived from philosophy and logic. The problem of privacy may be
approached in a fresh direction by starting with behavior rather
than with immediate experience. The strategy is certainly no more
arbitrary or circular than the earlier practice, and it has a surprising

result. Instead of concluding that man can know only his subjective
experiences—that he is bound forever to his private world and that
the external world is only a construct—a behavioral theory of
knowledge suggests that it is the private world which, if not entirely
unknowable, is at least not likely to be known well. The relations
between organism and environment involved in knowing are of
such a sort that the privacy of the world within the skin imposes
more serious limitations on personal knowledge than on the
accessibility of that world to the scientist.
An organism learns to react discriminatively to the world around it
under certain contingencies of reinforcement. Thus, a child learns
to name a color correctly when a given response is reinforced in
the presence of the color and extinguished in its absence. The
verbal community may make the reinforcement of an extensive
repertory of responses contingent on subtle properties of colored
stimuli. We have reason to believe that the child will not
discriminate among colors—that he will not see two colors as
different—until exposed to such contingencies. So far as we know,
the same process of differential reinforcement is required if a child
is to distinguish among the events occurring within his own skin.
Many contingencies involving private stimuli need not be
arranged by a verbal community, for they follow from simple
mechanical relations among stimuli, responses, and reinforcing
consequences. The various motions which comprise turning a
handspring, for example, are under the control of external and
internal stimuli and subject to external and internal reinforcing
consequences. But the performer is not necessarily “aware” of the
stimuli controlling his behavior, no matter how appropriate and
skillful it may be. “Knowing” or “being aware of” what is happening
in turning a handspring involves discriminative responses, such as
naming or describing, which arise from contingencies necessarily
arranged by a verbal environment. Such environments are
common. The community is generally interested in what a man is
doing, has done, or is planning to do and why, and it arranges
contingencies which generate verbal responses which name and
describe the external and internal stimuli associated with these
events. It challenges his verbal behavior by asking, “How do you
know?” and the speaker answers, if at all, by describing some of
the variables of which his verbal behavior was a function. The
“awareness” resulting from all this is a social product.

In attempting to set up such a repertoire, however, the verbal
community works under a severe handicap. It cannot always
arrange the contingencies required for subtle discriminations. It
cannot teach a child to call one pattern of private stimuli
“difﬁdence” and another “embarrassment” as effectively as it
teaches him to call one stimulus “red” and another “orange” for it
cannot be sure of the presence or absence of the private patterns
of stimuli appropriate to reinforcement or lack of reinforcement.
Privacy thus causes trouble, ﬁrst of all, for the verbal community.
The individual suffers in turn. Because the community cannot
reinforce self-descriptive responses consistently, a person cannot
describe or otherwise “know” events occurring within his own skin
as subtly and precisely as he knows events in the world at large.2
There are, of course, differences between external and internal
stimuli which are not mere differences in location. Proprioceptive
and interoceptive stimuli have a certain intimacy. They are likely to
be especially familiar. They are very much with us; we cannot
escape from a toothache as easily as from a deafening noise.
They may well be of a special kind; the stimuli we feel in pride or
sorrow may not closely resemble those we feel in sandpaper or
satin. But this does not mean that they differ in physical status. In
particular, it does not mean that they can be more easily or more
directly known. What is particularly clear and familiar to the potential
knower may be strange and distant to the verbal community
responsible for his knowing.

Conscious content
What are the private events to which, at least in a limited way, a
man may come to respond in ways we call “perceiving” or
“knowing”? Let us begin with the oldest, and in many ways the
most difﬁcult, kind represented by “the stubborn fact of
consciousness.” What is happening when a person observes the
conscious content of his mind, when he “looks at his sensations or
images”? Western philosophy and science have been
handicapped in answering these questions by an unfortunate
metaphor. The Greeks could not explain how a man could have
knowledge of something with which he was not in immediate
contact. How could he know an object on the other side of the
room, for example? Did he reach out and touch it with some sort of
invisible probe? Or did he never actually come in contact with the

object at all but only with a copy of it inside his body? Plato
supported the copy theory with his metaphor of the cave. Perhaps
a man never sees the real world at all but only shadows of it on the
wall of the cave in which he is imprisoned. Copies of the real world
projected into the body could compose the experience which a
man directly knows. A similar theory could also explain how one
can see objects which are “not really there,” as in hallucinations,
after-images, and memories. Neither explanation is, of course,
satisfactory. How a copy may arise at a distance is at least as
puzzling as how a man may know an object at a distance. Seeing
things which are not really there is no harder to explain than the
occurrence of copies of things not there to be copied.
The search for copies of the world within the body, particularly in
the nervous system, still goes on, but with discouraging results. If
the retina could suddenly be developed, like a photographic plate,
it would yield a poor picture. The nerve impulses in the optic tract
must have an even more tenuous resemblance to “what is seen.”
The patterns of vibrations which strike our ear when we listen to
music are quickly lost in transmission. The bodily reactions to
substances tasted, smelled, and touched would scarcely qualify as
faithful reproductions. These facts are discouraging for those who
are looking for copies of the real world within the body, but they are
fortunate for psychophysiology as a whole. At some point the
organism must do more than create duplicates. It must see, hear,
smell, and so on, as forms of action rather than of reproduction. It
must do some of the things it is differentially reinforced for doing
when it learns to respond discriminatively. The sooner the pattern
of the external world disappears after impinging on the organism,
the sooner the organism may get on with these other functions.
The need for something beyond, and quite different from,
copying is not widely understood. Suppose someone were to coat
the occipital lobes of the brain with a special photographic
emulsion which, when developed, yielded a reasonable copy of a
current visual stimulus. In many quarters this would be regarded as
a triumph in the physiology of vision. Yet nothing could be more
disastrous, for we should have to start all over again and ask how
the organism sees a picture in its occipital cortex, and we should
now have much less of the brain available in which to seek an
answer. It adds nothing to an explanation of how an organism
reacts to a stimulus to trace the pattern of the stimulus into the
body. It is most convenient, for both organism and

psychophysiologist, if the external world is never copied—if the
world we know is simply the world around us. The same may be
said of theories according to which the brain interprets signals sent
to it and in some sense reconstructs external stimuli. If the real
world is, indeed, scrambled in transmission but later reconstructed
in the brain, we must then start all over again and explain how the
organism sees the reconstruction.
An adequate treatment of this point would require a thorough
analysis of the behavior of seeing and of the conditions under
which we see (to continue with vision as a convenient modality). It
would be unwise to exaggerate our success to date. Discriminative
visual behavior arises from contingencies involving external stimuli
and overt responses, but possible private accompaniments must
not be overlooked. Some of the consequences of such
contingencies seem well established. It is usually easiest for us to
see a friend when we are looking at him, because visual stimuli
similar to those present when the behavior was acquired exert
maximal control over the response. But mere visual stimulation is
not enough; even after having been exposed to the necessary
reinforcement, we may not see a friend who is present unless we
have reason to do so. On the other hand, if the reasons are strong
enough, we may see him in someone bearing only a superﬁcial
resemblance or when no one like him is present at all. If conditions
favor seeing something else, we may behave accordingly. If, on a
hunting trip, it is important to see a deer, we may glance toward our
friend at a distance, see him as a deer, and shoot.
It is not, however, seeing our friend which raises the question of
conscious content but “seeing that we are seeing him.” There are
no natural contingencies for such behavior. We learn to see that
we are seeing only because a verbal community arranges for us to
do so. We usually acquire the behavior when we are under
appropriate visual stimulation, but it does not follow that the thing
seen must be present when we see that we are seeing it. The
contingencies arranged by the verbal environment may set up selfdescriptive responses describing the behavior of seeing even when
the thing seen is not present.
If seeing does not require the presence of things seen, we need
not be concerned about certain mental processes said to be
involved in the construction of such things—images, memories, and
dreams, for example. We may regard a dream, not as a display of

things seen by the dreamer, but simply as the behavior of seeing.
At no time during a daydream, for example, should we expect to
find within the organism anything which corresponds to the external
stimuli present when the dreamer ﬁrst acquired the behavior in
which he is now engaged. In simple recall we need not suppose
that we wander through some storehouse of memory until we ﬁnd
an object which we then contemplate. Instead of assuming that we
begin with a tendency to recognize such an object once it is found,
it is simpler to assume that we begin with a tendency to see it.
Techniques of self-management which facilitate recall—for
example, the use of mnemonic devices—can be formulated as
ways of strengthening behavior rather than of creating objects to
be seen. Freud dramatized the issue with respect to dreaming
when asleep in his concept of dreamwork—an activity in which
some part of the dreamer played the role of a theatrical producer
while another part sat in the audience. If a dream is, indeed,
something seen, then we must suppose that it is wrought as such;
but if it is simply the behavior of seeing, the dreamwork may be
dropped from the analysis. It took man a long time to understand
that when he dreamed of a wolf, no wolf was actually there. It has
taken him much longer to understand that not even a
representation of a wolf is there.
Eye movements which appear to be associated with dreaming
are in accord with this interpretation, since it is not likely that the
dreamer is actually watching a dream on the undersides of his
eyelids. When memories are aroused by electrical stimulation of the
brain, as in the work of Wilder Penﬁeld, it is also simpler to assume
that it is the behavior of seeing, hearing, and so on, which is
aroused rather than some copy of early environmental events
which the subject then looks at or listens to. Behavior similar to the
responses to the original events must be assumed in both cases—
the subject sees or hears—but the reproduction of the events seen
or heard is a needless complication. The familiar process of
response chaining is available to account for the serial character of
the behavior of remembering, but the serial linkage of stored
experiences (suggesting engrams in the form of sound ﬁlms)
demands a new mechanism.
The heart of the behavioristic position on conscious experience
may be summed up in this way: seeing does not imply something
seen. We acquire the behavior of seeing under stimulation from
actual objects, but it may occur in the absence of these objects

under the control of other variables. (So far as the world within the
skin is concerned, it always occurs in the absence of such objects.)
We also acquire the behavior of seeing-that-we-are-seeing when
we are seeing actual objects, but it may also occur in their
absence.
To question the reality or the nature of the things seen in
conscious experience is not to question the value of introspective
psychology or its methods. Current problems in sensation are
mainly concerned with the physiological function of receptors and
associated neural mechanisms. Problems in perception are, at the
moment, less intimately related to speciﬁc mechanisms, but the
trend appears to be in the same direction. So far as behavior is
concerned, both sensation and perception may be analyzed as
forms of stimulus control. The subject need not be regarded as
observing or evaluating conscious experiences. Apparent
anomalies of stimulus control, which are now explained by
appealing to a psychophysical relation or to the laws of perception,
may be studied in their own right. It is, after all, no real solution to
attribute them to the slippage inherent in converting a physical
stimulus into a subjective experience.
The experimental analysis of behavior has a little more to say on
this subject. Its techniques have recently been extended to what
might be called the psychophysics of lower organisms. Blough’s
adaptation of the Békésy technique—for example, in determining
the spectral sensitivity of pigeons and monkeys—yields sensory
data comparable with the reports of a trained observer (22, 23).
Herrnstein and van Sommers have recently developed a procedure
in which pigeons “bisect sensory intervals” (66). It is tempting to
describe these procedures by saying that investigators have found
ways to get nonverbal organisms to describe their sensations. The
fact is that a form of stimulus control has been investigated without
using a repertoire of self-observation or, rather, by constructing a
special repertoire, the nature and origin of which are clearly
understood. Rather than describe such experiments with the
terminology of introspection, we may formulate them in their proper
place in an experimental analysis. The behavior of the observer in
the traditional psychophysical experiment may then be
reinterpreted accordingly.

Mental way stations

So much for “conscious content,” the classical problem in
mentalistic philosophies. There are other mental states or
processes to be taken into account. Moods, cognitions, and
expectancies, for example, are also examined introspectively, and
descriptions are used in psychological formulations. The conditions
under which descriptive repertoires are set up are much less
successfully controlled. Terms describing sensations and images
are taught by manipulating discriminative stimuli—a relatively
amenable class of variables. The remaining mental events are
related to such operations as deprivation and satiation, emotional
stimulation, and various schedules of reinforcement. The difﬁculties
they present to the verbal community are suggested by the fact
that there is no psychophysics of mental states of this sort. That
fact has not inhibited the use of such states in explanatory
systems.
In an experimental analysis, the relation between a property of
behavior and an operation performed upon the organism is studied
directly. Traditional mentalistic formulations, however, emphasize
certain way stations. Where an experimental analysis might
examine the effect of punishment on behavior, a mentalistic
psychology will be concerned ﬁrst with the effect of punishment in
generating feelings of anxiety and then with the effect of anxiety
on behavior. The mental state seems to bridge the gap between
dependent and independent variables and is particularly attractive
when these are separated by long periods of time—when, for
example, the punishment occurs in childhood and the effect
appears in the behavior of the adult.
The practice is widespread. In a demonstration experiment, a
hungry pigeon was conditioned to turn around in a clockwise
direction. A ﬁnal, smoothly executed pattern of behavior was
shaped by reinforcing successive approximations with food.
Students who had watched the demonstration were asked to write
an account of what they had seen. Their responses included the
following: (1) the pigeon was conditioned to expect reinforcement
for the right kind of behavior; (2) the pigeon walked around, hoping
that something would bring the food back again; (3) the pigeon
observed that a certain behavior seemed to produce a particular
result; (4) the pigeon felt that food would be given it because of its
action; and (5) the pigeon came to associate his action with the
click of the food-dispenser. The observed facts could be stated

respectively as follows: (1) the pigeon was reinforced when it
emitted a given kind of behavior; (2) the pigeon walked around
until the food container again appeared; (3) a certain behavior
produced a particular result; (4) food was given to the pigeon when
it acted in a given way; and (5) the click of the food-dispenser was
temporally related to the pigeon’s action. These statements
describe the contingencies of reinforcement. The expressions
“expect,” “hope,” “observe,” “feel,” and “associate” go beyond them
to identify effects on the pigeon. The effect actually observed was
clear enough: the pigeon turned more skillfully and more
frequently; but that was not the effect reported by the students. (If
pressed, they would doubtless have said that the pigeon turned
more skillfully and more frequently because it expected, hoped,
and felt that if it did so food would appear.)
The events reported by the students were observed, if at all, in
their own behavior. They were describing what they would have
expected, felt, and hoped for under similar circumstances. But they
were able to do so only because a verbal community had brought
relevant terms under the control of certain stimuli, and this was
done when the community had access only to the kinds of public
information available to the students in the demonstration.
Whatever the students knew about themselves which permitted
them to infer comparable events in the pigeon must have been
learned from a verbal community which saw no more of their
behavior than they had seen of the pigeon’s. Private stimuli may
have entered into the control of their self-descriptive repertoires,
but the readiness with which they applied them to the pigeon
indicates that external stimuli had remained important. The
extraordinary strength of a mentalistic interpretation is really a sort
of proof that in describing a private way station one is, to a
considerable extent, making use of public information. (The speed
and facility with which the mental life of a pigeon or person is
reported are suspicious. Nothing is easier than to say that
someone does something “because he likes to do it” or that he
does one thing rather than another “because he has made a
choice.” But have we the knowledge about his private life which
statements of that sort imply, or at least ought to imply? It is much
more likely that we are employing a standard set of explanations
which have no more validity—and in the long run are no more
useful—than a standard set of metaphors.)
The mental way station is often accepted as a terminal datum,

however. When a man must be trained to discriminate between
different planes, ships, and so on, it is tempting to stop at the point
at which he can be said to identify such objects. It is implied that if
he can identify an object, he can name it, label it, describe it, or act
appropriately in some other way. In the training process he always
behaves in one of these ways; no way station called “identiﬁcation”
appears in practice or need appear in theory. (Any discussion of
the discriminative behavior generated by the verbal environment to
permit a person to examine his conscious content must be qualified
accordingly.)
Cognitive theories stop at way stations where the mental action
is usually somewhat more complex than identification. For example,
a subject is said to know who and where he is, what something is,
or what has happened or is going to happen—regardless of the
forms of behavior through which this knowledge was set up or
which may now testify to its existence. Similarly, in accounting for
verbal behavior, a listener or reader is said to understand the
meaning of a passage, although the actual changes brought
about by listening to, or reading, the passage are not speciﬁed. In
the same way, schedules of reinforcement are sometimes studied
simply for their effects on the expectations of the organism
exposed to them, without discussing the implied relation between
expectation and action. Recall, inference, and reasoning may be
formulated only to the point at which an experience is remembered
or a conclusion reached, behavioral manifestations being ignored.
In practice, the investigator always carries through to some
response, if only a response of self-description.
On the other hand, mental states are often studied as causes of
action. A speaker thinks of something to say before saying it, and
this explains what he says, although the sources of his thoughts
are not examined. An unusual act is called “impulsive,” without
inquiring further into the origin of the unusual impulse. A behavioral
maladjustment shows anxiety, the source of which is neglected.
One salivates upon seeing a lemon because it reminds one of a
sour taste, but why it does so is not speciﬁed. The formulation
leads directly to a technology based on the manipulation of mental
states. To change a man’s voting behavior, we change his
opinions; to induce him to act, we strengthen his beliefs; to make
him eat, we make him feel hungry; to prevent wars, we reduce
warlike tensions in the minds of men; to effect psychotherapy, we

alter troublesome mental states. In practice, all these ways of
changing a man’s mind reduce to manipulating his environment,
verbal or otherwise.
In many cases we can reconstruct a complete causal chain by
identifying the mental state which is the effect of an environmental
variable with the mental state which is the cause of action. But this
is not always enough. In traditional mentalistic philosophies various
things happen at the way station which alter the relation between
the terminal events. The psychophysical functions and the
perceptual laws which distort the physical stimulus before it reaches
the way station have already been mentioned. Once the station is
reached, other effects are said to occur. Mental states alter one
another. A painful memory may never affect behavior, or may affect
it in a different way, if another mental state succeeds in repressing
it. Conﬂicting variables may be reconciled before reaching behavior
if the subject engages in mental action called “making a decision.”
Dissonant cognitions generated by conﬂicting conditions of
reinforcement will not be reﬂected in behavior if the subject can
“persuade himself” that one condition was actually of a different
magnitude or kind. These disturbances in simple causal linkages
between environment and behavior can be formulated and studied
experimentally as interactions among variables; but the possibility
has not been fully exploited, and the effects still provide a
formidable stronghold for mentalistic theories designed to bridge
the gap between dependent and independent variables in the
analysis of behavior.

Methodological objections
The behavioristic argument is nevertheless still valid. We may
object, ﬁrst, to the predilection for unﬁnished causal sequences. A
disturbance in behavior is not explained by relating it to felt anxiety
until the anxiety has in turn been explained. An action is not
explained by attributing it to expectations until the expectations
have in turn been accounted for. Complete causal sequences
might, of course, include references to way stations, but the fact is
that the way station generally interrupts the account in one
direction or the other. For example, there must be thousands of
instances in the psychoanalytic literature in which a thought or
memory is said to have been relegated to the unconscious
because it was painful or intolerable, but the percentage of those

offering even the most casual suggestion as to why it was painful
or intolerable must be very small. Perhaps explanations could have
been offered, but the practice has discouraged the completion of
the causal sequence.
A second objection is that a preoccupation with mental way
stations burdens a science of behavior with all the problems raised
by the limitations and inaccuracies of self-descriptive repertoires.
We need not take the extreme position that mediating events or
any data about them obtained through introspection must be ruled
out of consideration, but we should certainly welcome other ways
of treating the data more satisfactorily. Independent variables
change the behaving organism, often in ways which survive for
many years, and such changes affect subsequent behavior. The
subject may be able to describe some of these intervening states
in useful ways, either before or after they have affected behavior.
On the other hand, behavior may be extensively modiﬁed by
variables of which, and of the effect of which, the subject is never
aware. So far as we know, self-descriptive responses do not alter
controlling relationships. If a severe punishment is less effective
than a mild one, it is not because it cannot be “kept in mind.”
(Certain behaviors involved in self-management, such as reviewing
a history of punishment, may alter behavior; but they do so by
introducing other variables rather than by changing a given
relation.)
Perhaps the most serious objection concerns the order of
events. Observation of one’s own behavior necessarily follows the
behavior. Responses which seem to be describing intervening
states alone may embrace behavioral effects. “I am hungry” may
describe, in part, the strength of the speaker’s on-going ingestive
behavior. “I was hungrier than I thought” seems particularly to
describe behavior rather than an intervening, possibly causal,
state. More serious examples of a possibly mistaken order are to
be found in theories of psychotherapy. Before asserting that the
release of a repressed wish has a therapeutic effect on behavior,
or that when one knows why he is neurotically ill he will recover, we
should consider the plausible alternative that a change in behavior
resulting from therapy has made it possible for the subject to recall
a repressed wish or to understand his illness.

Note 8.1

Private stimuli

To the mentalistic philosopher mental life is “the only thing he
knows for certain—in himself, if not in others.” From that point of
view the behaviorist seems either to be saying that he doesn’t see
images, feel pains, and so on (thus opening himself to a charge of
bad faith) or to be refusing to accept observed events as evidence.
What he refuses to accept are the dimensions traditionally
assigned to what he observes. Some of the objects of
introspection are private (covert) responses. Watson was
particularly intrigued with this possibility. So far as we know, the
responses are executed with the same organs as observable
responses but on a smaller scale. The stimuli they generate are
weak but nevertheless of the same kind as those generated by
overt responses. It would be a mistake to refuse to consider them
as data just because a second observer cannot feel or see them,
at least without the help of instruments.
Other common objects of introspection are proprioceptive and
interoceptive stimuli and (particularly important in the case of
feelings) responses of the autonomic nervous system. It would be
absurd to deny the existence of events of this kind or the possibility
that a person may respond to them and learn to describe them. It
is equally absurd to argue that because they occur inside the skin
they have nonphysical dimensions. The issue is particularly crucial
when the behavior is discriminative. We may learn to see things
with ease, but it is hard to learn to see that we are seeing them, in
either their presence or absence. It is an interesting possibility that
the concept of experience, as distinct from reality, would never
have arisen had not certain exigencies in the social environment
induced men to observe that they are responding to stimuli.
Pain is commonly offered as an example of immediate
experience. Painful stimuli are inside the body and often very
strong, and they do not need to be copied. Nevertheless it may be
argued that they are not the same things as the “experience of
pain.” “The experience of pain …,” says Brand Blanshard (19), “is
self-evidently not the same thing as a physical movement of any
kind.” Physical movement is not, for example, “dull” or
“excruciating.” It is nevertheless true that many adjectives used to
describe pain were ﬁrst applied to the things which caused pain. A
dull pain is caused by a dull object and a sharp pain by a sharp
object. “Excruciating” is taken from the practice of cruciﬁxion. Even
these intimate inner stimuli are thus described as things.

The experience of having an idea or an impulse or of engaging
in cognitive processes is by no means self-evident. In our own
culture the degree of preoccupation with experience is shown at
one extreme in the thoroughgoing extrovert and at the other in the
introspective psychologist. Whether we see these “mental events”
at all depends upon our history of reinforcement. Descartes could
not begin, as he thought he could, by saying, “Cogito ergo sum.”
He had to begin as a baby—a baby whose subsequent verbal
environment eventually generated in him (though not in millions of
his contemporaries) certain responses of which “cogito” was an
example. The stimuli controlling that response (the events to which
it refers) are almost inaccessible to the verbal community which
builds descriptive repertoires, and they are therefore seldom
described by, or observed by, two people in the same way. We
react to these events because of contingencies of reinforcement
which are perhaps as complex as many of those which generate
the constructs of science.

Note 8.2

Awareness

When you observe that you are seeing something, so that you can
say “Yes” when asked, “Do you see that?”, are you simply seeing
the thing again in a sort of “double take”? Why should seeing
something twice have more awareness attached to it than seeing it
once? Evidently, you are observing yourself in the act of seeing it,
and that act is different from the thing seen. The act can occur
when the thing seen is not present, and you can then say “Yes” to
the question, “Can you see it in your imagination?” The doubletake theory seems to require that you conjure up a copy of the
thing (or retrieve it from the storehouse of memory), look at it, and
then look at it again. But it is possible that to observe that you see
something in memory is simply to observe the behavior once
evoked when you saw the thing itself.
We are aware of what we are doing when we describe the
topography of our behavior. We are aware of why we are doing it
when we describe relevant variables, such as important aspects of
the occasion or the reinforcement. The verbal community
generates self-descriptive behavior by asking “What are you
doing?” or “Why are you doing it?” and reinforcing our answers
appropriately. The behavior with which we reply is not to be
confused with the behavior generated by the original

contingencies. It is not necessarily “linguistic,” but it is verbal in the
sense that we should have no reason to engage in it were it not for
contingencies arranged by a verbal community. Such
contingencies may respect separate features of our behavior—for
example, they may be responsible for the fact that we know “what
we have done” in the sense of being able to describe our response
but not “why we did it” in the sense of being able to identify
relevant variables.
Awareness may be needed in constructing rules which generate
behavior appropriate to given contingencies (Chapter 6). When we
construct rules without being subjected to the contingencies (for
example, when we extract rules from an analysis of a reinforcing
system such as a sample space), there is nothing in our behavior
we need to be aware of; but when we construct a rule from
observations of our behavior under exposure to the contingencies
(without knowing about them in any other sense), we must be
aware of the behavior and of the variables of which it is a function.
An advanced verbal community generates a high level of such
awareness. Its members not only behave appropriately with respect
to the contingencies they encounter in their daily lives, they
examine those contingencies and construct rules—on-the-spot
rules for personal use or general rules which prove valuable to both
themselves and the community as a whole.
A science of behavior does not, as is so often asserted, ignore
awareness. On the contrary, it goes far beyond mentalistic
psychologies in analyzing self-descriptive behavior. It has
suggested better ways of teaching self-knowledge and the selfcontrol which depends upon self-knowledge. It also emphasizes
the importance of being aware at the right time. Sustained
awareness can be a disadvantage; there is no reason why we
should scrutinize every response we make or examine every
occasion upon which we respond.
The discovery of rules and the awareness which the discovery
demands are particularly important in learning and in solving
problems. In fact, they are so important that many psychologists
have, as we have seen, deﬁned learning and problem solving as
the extraction of rules. But nonverbal organisms solve problems
without formulating rules and without being aware of what they are
doing, and it would be surprising if man had lost this ability.
Laboratory experiments often seem to show that a subject can

describe a set of contingencies as soon as his behavior shows an
effect, but the subjects come from a culture which has made the
scrutiny of contingencies almost inevitable, particularly when
participating in a laboratory experiment on learning or problem
solving.
A subject can learn to respond without knowing that he has
responded if the reinforced response is so subtle that he cannot
perceive it (62). Whether his behavior can be controlled by stimuli
which he cannot perceive under the contingencies which generate
awareness is the issue raised by “subliminal stimuli.” The term is not
a contradiction. A man may be able to identify or describe a
stimulus under contingencies arranged by a verbal community
though he does not respond to it under nonverbal contingencies.
For example, only when he is told the solution to a problem in
concept formation, does he respond correctly. Stimuli are certainly
effective in contingencies which the subject has had no reason to
analyze. The question is not whether one necessarily sees
contingencies as such when they take effect, but of what happens
when a verbal community induces one to see them. Learning
without awareness is simply a special case of behaving without
awareness, and the latter is common. We are by no means always
aware of what we are doing or why. We are perhaps more likely to
be aware when we are learning something new, because it is at
such times that self-descriptive behavior is of most use.
The behaviorist is often asked “What about the unconscious?” as
if it presented an especially difﬁcult problem, but the only problem
is consciousness. All behavior is basically unconscious in the sense
that it is shaped and maintained by contingencies which are
effective even though they are not observed or otherwise
analyzed. In some cultures, including our own, well-established
practices of self-description generate consciousness in the present
sense. We not only behave, we observe that we are behaving, and
we observe the conditions under which we behave.
Freud’s unconscious was not, however, simply behavior of which
a person has not become aware. He emphasized special reasons
why self-descriptive behavior may be lacking. Some of the most
powerful contingencies arranged by the community to generate
awareness involve punishment. To blame someone is to attribute
aversive consequences to his behavior. The assertion “You did
that!” asserts a connection between behavior (what the person did)
and undesirable consequences (that). The accused is ordered to

observe the causal connection. As a result, similar behavior or
behavior having similar consequences may generate conditioned
aversive stimuli, possibly felt as guilt or shame. Freud argued that it
is the punishing consequences which repress self-description or
consciousness. The contingencies remain effective but are not
noted. To be told that we carry bad news with alacrity because we
are reinforced when we hurt other people is to be told that our
behavior in carrying news is punishable as an instance of hurting
someone rather than admirable as a form of conveying information.
It is easier for us to note that we carry bad news in order to supply
a friend with important information than to note that we behave in
precisely the same way in order to hurt him.

Note 8.3

Mind and matter

What is matter? — Never mind.
What is mind? — No matter.
—Punch, 1855
It is curious that matter and mind are synonyms rather than
antonyms when referring to the importance of things. Evans and
E va n s (44) give “He mattered not whether he went” as one
equivalent to “He did not mind whether he went.” You should mind
your P’s and Q’s because your P’s and Q’s matter.

Note 8.4

The copy theory

The dualistic argument runs something like this. We do not know
the world as it is but only as it appears to be. We cannot know the
real world because it is outside our bodies, most of it at a distance.
We know only copies of it inside our bodies. We know them in the
sense of being in contact with them, of being acquainted with
them. (The word acquainted comes from the same root as
cognition.) We grasp them or apprehend them, as we apprehend a
criminal. We know them almost in the biblical sense of possessing
them sexually. (Polanyi [113] has recently argued for a comparable
intimacy outside the body. The knower invades the known rather
than vice versa: “We may consider the act of comprehending a
whole, as an interiorization of its parts, by virtue of which we come
to dwell in these parts; this indwelling being logically similar to the

way we live in our body.” It is certainly “logical,” for it has
traditionally been argued that the homunculus can leave the body
and invade other parts of the universe.)
The copy comes to us from the outside world. It can be
intercepted by shutting our eyes, but by a special mental act it can
be reinstated or recalled while our eyes are still closed or open on
a different part of the world. Reinstatement is possible long after
the copy is made, although the accuracy deteriorates. For that
matter even on-the-spot copies are not true to life. When the world
of experience is related to the real world in a fairly orderly way
(Fechner thought the relation was logarithmic), it is said to be
composed of sensations. When the discrepancy is greater (a
straight line looks curved, a ﬁxed point seems to move), it is said to
be composed of perceptions or illusions. When there is no current
relation at all, it is said to be composed of fantasies, dreams,
delusions, and hallucinations.
The Ames demonstrations are particularly dramatic examples of
the discrepancies between the world as it really is and as it seems
to be. They make it clear that experience may triumph over reality.
But how do we know about the world as it really is? In one of the
Ames demonstrations the observer looks into a room through one
window and sees it as a normal rectangular room and then through
a window at the side and sees it as trapezoidal. But surely one
window does not reveal the room as it appears to be and the other
as it really is. Both windows show it only as it appears to be. The
fact that the room is “really” trapezoidal is an inference, similar to
the scientiﬁc inferences which lead to the proposition that the
materials of which the room is composed are mostly empty space.
Inferences never get us away from the experiential nature of
original data, as Polanyi and Bridgman have recently insisted,
taking their cue from Bishop Berkeley (see page 155). If we accept
the Greek position that we can know only our sensations and
perceptions, there is only one world, and it is the world of mind.
It is a little too simple to paraphrase the behavioristic alternative
by saying that there is indeed only one world and that it is the
world of matter, for the word “matter” is then no longer useful.
Whatever the stuff may be of which the world is made, it contains
organisms (of which we are examples) which respond to other parts
of it and thus “know” it in a sense not far from “contact.” Where the
dualist must account for discrepancies between the real world and
the world of experience, and the Berkeleyan idealist between

different experiences, the behaviorist investigates discrepancies
among different responses.
It is no part of such an investigation to try to trace the real world
into the organism and to watch it become a copy. A recent article
on “Vision and Touch” (116) begins as follows:
A visual perception is not simply a copy of the image on the retina. The image has two
dimensions, the perceived object three. The image is upside down, but the object is seen
right-side up. An image of a given size can be projected on the retina either from a small
object that is nearby or from a large object that is distant, and yet one usually perceives the
actual size of the object quite accurately. The image is received by millions of separate lightsensitive cells in the retina, but one sees a unified object with a definite shape.

The authors thus assume three things: (1) an object, (2) an
optical image on the retina (and other transforms of that image in
the nervous system), and (3) a “visual perception.” The ﬁrst two are
physical, the third presumably something else. They are concerned
with discrepancies: the image on the retina is not a good copy of
the object. From the present point of view the object is what is
actually seen. It is not inside the perceiver and hence cannot be
intimately embraced, but it is what the perceiver perceives. We
account for his behavior in terms of the object seen plus a possibly
long history of exposure to similar objects. It is only the curious
belief that there is a copy inside the body which leads
psychologists to be concerned with supposed transformations.
The sequence of physical and physiological events which are
involved when an organism perceives an object is, of course, a
legitimate subject for study. The first stage, between the object and
the surface of the perceiver, is part of physics. The second, the
optics of the eye, is the physics of an anatomical structure. The
third is physiological. It has been almost hopelessly misrepresented
in dualistic theories, which have led physiologists to search for the
inner structures which are seen. The nervous system is not
engaged in making copies of stimuli; it plays, however, an
important role in reacting to them in other ways (see Chapter 9).
A curious by-product of dualism is the belief that phenomena
said to show extrasensory perception are parapsychological rather
than paraphysical. Suppose we teach a pigeon to match the Rhine
cards. The ﬁve cards appear in a row of transparent windows any
one of which the pigeon can peck. Above the row is a sample card
which may be any one of the ﬁve cards chosen at random. The

pigeon is reinforced for pecking the card which matches the
sample. Both the pigeon and the experimenter who arranges the
contingencies have normal sensory access to all cards, and the
pigeon fairly quickly begins to match the patterns successfully.
Suppose, now, that the sample card is enclosed in a box where it
can be seen by the experimenter but not by the pigeon, and let us
suppose that the pigeon still matches the cards, at least better
than it should do by chance. From the point of view of a science of
behavior, the pigeon is still responding appropriately under
speciﬁed
physical contingencies
of
reinforcement.
The
experimenter has not actually followed the sequence of physical
events leading from the exposed card to the eye of the pigeon,
and as a psychologist he has no reason to investigate the
sequence from the concealed card. Physicists, however, should be
greatly disturbed. It is only because the psychologist has believed
that the pigeon must conjure up a copy of the exposed card in its
mind that he calls the phenomenon parapsychological.
The visual world has dominated the ﬁeld of perception. It would
be hard to “visualize” an auditory stimulus and we have no
comparable term for auditory copy-making.
Tastes and smells would be particularly hard to copy, but they
can be regarded as contact stimuli and hence susceptible to being
known without copying. Touch is the obvious mode in which we
know in the sense of making contact with. We are intimate with the
things we touch and do not need to copy them. Looked at from
without, the skin is part of the physical world; looked at from within,
it is part of the world of experience. But, alas, even here the copy
is defective. The sense of touch ought to show a sharp isomorphic
correspondence between things as they are and things as they
appear to be, but the “retina” of the skin must form an even more
unsatisfactory image than that of the eye. One “looks at” a touched
point through overlapping networks of nerves. The two-point limen
was an early sign of trouble.
The psychology of sensation, beginning in British Empiricism as
the study of how we can know the real world, eventually became
the physiology of end organs. But the operation of end organs
could not explain all the facts of experience; hence a psychology
of perception. When the nervous system was invoked, perception
moved toward brain physiology. (Köhler, for example, explained the
facts of visual perception with gestaltig brain-ﬁelds.) But the
neurological problem is misunderstood, as we shall see in Chapter

9, as a search for inner copies.
The problems of perception have to do with the stimulus control
of behavior. Different stimuli sometimes seem to have the same
effect, and the same stimulus sometimes seems to have different
effects. We can explain this, not by tracing the real world into the
organism and seeing how it is altered, but by analyzing the
contingencies of reinforcement. It is really not too hard to explain
the fact that organisms react in different ways at different times.
The views through the two windows in the trapezoidal room are not
interesting because there are discrepancies in responses to “what
must be the same physical object” but because a long history of
reinforcement with respect to rectangular rooms—the kinds of
things which happen in them and their appearances from different
aspects—has generated surprisingly different responses. The
curious effect of a rotating trapezoid is not some strange quirk of
the inner copy of a stimulus in a brain-ﬁeld, but the product of a
long history of reinforcement with respect to rectangles seen from
different aspects. The “constructs” of science differ from “immediate
experience” in many ways (lacking, for example, the warmth, color,
and intimacy of direct experience) because they are the products
of particularly complex contingencies of reinforcement possibly
involving long sequences of responses.

Note 8.5

The behavior of seeing

The editor of a handbook in psychology objected to a contributor’s
use of “discriminate” as a synonym for “see.” He complained that
He discriminates a cat on the back fence was not idiomatic. But
Skeat’s Etymological Dictionary of the English Language deﬁnes
discriminate as discern or distinguish, both of which would have
been acceptable. He distinguishes or discerns a cat on the back
fence is idiomatic. There is a colloquial use of make out which is
close: Can you make that out? Can you make out what that is?
Make alone sufﬁces in What do you make of it? These are all
synonyms of see as a kind of behavior differentially reinforced with
respect to a stimulus.
The behavior is not to be confused with precurrent responses
which make it possible to see or to see better. Looking at a picture
differs from seeing it, just as listening to music differs from hearing
it. One may look without seeing and listen without hearing, or at

least before seeing or hearing. The precurrent behavior is obvious
when one looks toward a picture or listens by cupping a hand
behind the ear, but there are presumably comparable behaviors of
lesser magnitude. They are reinforced indirectly by what is then
seen or heard. They are much more easily identiﬁed and described
than seeing or hearing.
The verb “discriminate” has an advantage over see, discern, or
make out, because it reminds us of the appropriate contingencies.
The difﬁculty is that the contingencies emphasize the controlling
stimulus but do not demand a speciﬁc form of response or a
speciﬁc reinforcer. In studying discrimination, the stimulus is
carefully manipulated, but the response and the reinforcement may
be quite arbitrary. The question “Do you see that?” does not
specify the topography of the behavior, although further details are
speciﬁed in injunctions such as “Tell me what it is” or “Point to it.”
The expression “seeing something” refers to a wide range of
behaviors generated by a wide range of contingencies having in
common a particular stimulus. Perhaps that is all we report when
we report that we see something. The report is roughly equivalent
to the statement: “Specify the rest of the contingencies and if I do
not then respond, it is not from any defect in the stimulus.”
Between seeing a thing which is there now and recalling it when
it is no longer there, lies an important middle ground in which the
thing is not all there. The dog lover is automatically reinforced when
he sees dogs (135, page 271). The behavior of seeing dogs is
therefore strong. It is most easily evoked by actual dogs, but it is
also within reach of a series of stimuli of decreasing verisimilitude:
wax museum models, life-size paintings or photographs in full color,
unpainted sculpture, black and white paintings or photographs,
and pencil sketches. What is seen may be simply the stimulus, but
it is likely to be more than is really there. Certainly that is true when
such a person sees a dog in an ink blot or cloud pattern. The ﬁnal
step is seeing a dog when there is no relevant stimulus whatsoever
—daydreaming of dogs rather than being reminded of them. The
true lover is distinguished by the fact that he does not need stimuli
in order to see his beloved. It is possible that religions have
proscribed idolatry for that reason. The use of an idol in order to
see a god is a sign of weakness. Secular pictures or statues may
be proscribed for the same reason: “This looking at a thing in order
to think of a person is the very basis of idolatry,” said George
Borrow (24), speaking about statues of Shakespeare as well as

about Moses and graven images.
When we talk about seeing, we are talking about a common part
of many responses. In any speciﬁc instance contingencies respect
the topography of a response and the reinforcement contingent on
both the stimulus and the response. If we are interested in stimulus
control, we may adopt arbitrary responses and reinforcers (as is
done in psychophysics, for example) or deal with characteristics of
behavior common to many instances in which responses and
reinforcers vary. The way station of sensation or perception seems
to cut across a causal sequence at the point at which a stimulus
has acted but a response has not yet been made. The dangers in
such a formulation have been noted.
Even if there were private copies of the external world, we should
still have to answer the question “what is seeing?” Put the copy
seen wherever you like—at the surface of the organism, in the
depths of the nervous system, or in the mind—and you still have to
explain what happens when it is seen. The behaviorist does not
need to support the notion of experience as a form of contact or
possession and can therefore leave the environment where it is.
The whole organism is then available in analyzing the behavior of
seeing.

Note 8.6

Way stations

In tracing behavior back through a causal sequence, Freud
stopped at the way stations in his mental apparatus which
represented early experience. The evidence for the experience
was seldom independently checked. It was argued that what the
patient remembered was more important than what actually
happened or whether anything happened at all. Mental precursors
were thus inferred from some parts of the patient’s behavior and
used to explain other parts. Something similar is done when
behavior exhibited in taking a mental test is said to explain
behavior exhibited elsewhere.
The causal sequence is sometimes transected at the level of
knowledge. Like perception, knowledge may function as the end
product of stimulation or as the beginning of action. Verbal
behavior which describes reality (which has the form of the “tact”
deﬁned in [141]) plays a similar role. A response of given
topography is reinforced by the verbal community when it

“corresponds” to a stimulus in conventional ways. The importance
of the stimulus control brings the tact very close to the classical
notion of passive perception or contemplative knowledge. It is one
of the great accomplishments of the verbal community that it
generates verbal behavior of this form. It does so because the
close relation between the topography of behavior and the tacted
stimulus is useful to it. A tact is, in a sense, a way station between
the stimulus affecting the speaker and the action taken by the
listener. It has the independent status claimed for a merely
contemplative knowledge, and it may have suggested the
possibility of private knowledge having a similar function. Nonverbal
contingencies do not generate objective knowledge in the same
sense.
It is often argued that science is concerned not only with
prediction and control but with understanding or even with simple
contemplation, but scientiﬁc knowledge is not an elaborated
perception of the external world in the mind of the scientist but
rather what scientists do about the world. When they construct
rules (including laws, theories, models, maps), the rules are
sometimes regarded as improved, stable, and manipulable forms of
knowledge. The rules seem to replace images in the mind of the
scientist and are therefore close to simple understanding or
contemplation, but they are not to be found in anyone’s mind.

Note 8.7

Feelings

We use “to feel” to denote the passive sensing of bodily stimuli, as
we use “to see” and “to hear” to denote the sensing of stimuli which
reach the body from a distance. We feel objects with which we are
in contact as we see objects at a distance. Each mode of
stimulation has its own sense organs. We use “to feel” in a more
active sense to denote precurrent behavior which intensiﬁes or
clariﬁes stimuli. We feel a surface to discover how it feels, as we
look at something to discover how it looks, or listen to something to
discover how it sounds. We do not, however, feel states or events
which are deep inside the body—like aches, pains, movement, or
postures—in an active sense. There appears to be no behavior
comparable to running the hand over a surface which clariﬁes such
stimuli.
Things with which we are in contact do not raise the problem of
knowing things at a distance. We know them without constructing

copies. The passive feeling of wet glass is not the wet glass, nor is
it a copy of wet glass in the sense in which a visual sensation or
perception is said to be a copy of a thing seen. The felt pain of a
toothache is not simply the inﬂamed nerve, but neither is it a copy
of the inﬂammation. Possibly because we do not seem to construct
copies of things felt, it is not argued that we recall feelings by
conjuring up old copies. In a sense a feeling seems to be both the
thing felt and the act of feeling it. The things with which a person is
in contact at the surface of his body are public stimuli, accessible to
the verbal community, and the community can therefore teach
words like smooth, rough, oily, or sticky without difﬁculty. But things
inside the body are not readily accessible, and verbal responses
describing them are likely to be imprecise and unreliable.
Among the things inside the body which are felt are
proprioceptive and interoceptive stimuli. We feel gas pains, lame
muscles, dizziness, hunger pangs, a full bladder. We also feel
behavior, including very weak behavior and conditions which
precede or are associated with behaving. Autonomic reﬂex
responses to conditioned stimuli are among the emotions which are
felt—for example, “the anxiety” evoked by a preaversive stimulus.
To “feel like vomiting” is either to feel stimuli which have preceded
or accompanied vomiting, or to feel actual small-scale responses.
We also feel operant behavior at a comparable level. When we say
“I feel like going” we may be reporting incipient responses of going
or conditions which have preceded or accompanied going. When
we say “I don’t feel like playing chess” in response to a suggestion,
we may be reporting the absence of any behavior in response to
the suggestion or of conditions which commonly accompany
playing chess.
Many adjectives describing “states” of behavior presumably refer
to combinations of such stimuli. “I feel hungry” is presumably a
report of interoceptive stimulation such as hunger pangs, or small
scale operant responses which have been reinforced by food, or
possibly other conditions associated with a probability of getting
food or eating. “I feel angry” may refer both to reﬂex and operant
behavior characteristic of the emotion of anger. When a
characteristic reinforcement has not been forthcoming, we may
report “I feel discouraged” and thus describe a low probability of
responding and some of the emotional effects of nonreinforcement.

The traditional argument is that when a man goes without food,
he ﬁrst grows hungry and that feelings of hunger then prompt him
to eat. We observe simply that the probability that he will eat
increases as a function of the length of time without food. He may
feel certain bodily conditions associated either with the probability
of eating or the shortage of food, and he may refer to these when
he tells us that he feels hungry, provided the verbal community has
taught him to do so. Internal states are the “referents” of his
description of his feelings, and as such are among the
independent variables controlling his verbal behavior. What is felt is
certainly relevant to a causal sequence, but it does not follow that
the act of feeling is an essential part of that sequence. According
to Butterﬁeld (32) Aristotle held that falling bodies accelerated
because they were more jubilant as they found themselves nearer
home, as a horse accelerates in approaching home as he returns
from a journey. We no longer take the feelings of a falling body
seriously. Why do we do so with a horse? It is true that a person
who has gone without food for some time not only eats but feels
hungry. A person who has been attacked not only responds
aggressively but feels angry. A person who is no longer reinforced
when responding in a given way not only responds less readily but
feels discouraged or frustrated. An even closer relation can be
shown: the longer he has been without food, the hungrier he feels
and the more voraciously he eats, the more violently he is
attacked, the angrier he feels and the more aggressively he
responds; the longer he has gone without reinforcement, the more
discouraged or frustrated he feels and the less likely he is to
respond at all. But the feelings are at best accompaniments of the
behavior, not causes.
We sometimes eat because we are hungry and sometimes to
avoid hurting the feelings of the cook. We may eat in the same way
in both cases, but we may “feel” differently. It is sometimes argued
that we must mention the feelings in order to give an adequate
description of the behavior, but what we need to mention are the
controlling variables—which also account for the feelings. A
distinction is usually made between killing animals for food and
killing a rival or predator. There may well be a difference in feeling,
but again the main difference is in the controlling variables, which
account for both the behavior and the bodily conditions felt.
Blanshard (19) has argued against the behavioristic position on

the grounds that it “strictly and literally” follows that “Hitler’s hatred
of the Jews contributed nothing toward his orders to have them
exterminated” or that Newton’s ideas of gravitation never affected
“in the slightest degree what he said or put down on paper.” The
implication is that these statements are absurd. But are they? We
infer Hitler’s hatred from a long series of verbal and physical acts.
Hitler himself no doubt had other information, for he must have felt
hatred in the form of covert acts of the same sort as well as strong
responses of his autonomic nervous system. But no part of this
complex was the cause of any other part—unless, indeed,
following James’ famous dictum, we could say that part of the
action caused the feelings. A simpler view is that both the public
persecution of the Jews and the private emotional responses were
the result of Hitler’s environmental history. It is too late to discover
enough of that history to make a convincing case, (only historians
and psychoanalysts attempt to explain individual behavior on such
evidence), but it is important not to overlook its probable relevance.
If we want to do anything about genocide, it is to the environment
that we must turn. We cannot make men stop killing each other by
changing their feelings; we must change the environment. In doing
so we may well reduce the “mental tensions” which accompany,
and are erroneously said to foster, warlike acts.
And so with Newton. We infer Newton’s ideas from the things he
said and wrote. Newton himself knew about things he almost said
or wrote, as well as things he said or wrote and revoked, but the
ideas he did not quite express were not the causes of the ideas he
expressed. Covert responses are not the causes of overt, both are
the products of common variables. It is important to remember this
when we try to induce young people to have ideas. For more than
two thousand years teachers have been trying to stimulate minds,
exercise rational powers, and implant or tease out ideas, and they
have very little to show for it. A much more promising program is to
construct an educational environment, verbal and nonverbal, in
which certain kinds of things, some of them original, will be said
and written (152).
Did Shakespeare actually represent Othello as moved to action
by feelings of jealousy? We should quite justly complain that he
had not motivated his character if he had done so. He paints a
detailed picture of jealous behavior ending in the smothering of the
innocent Desdemona. Most of that behavior, beﬁtting a play, is
verbal. Othello tells us about his actions past, present, and future

(in the last as his “intentions”) and about his emotional responses,
both public and private. These are all parts of his jealous behavior
and no one part is the cause of another. If he had had time, he
might have described the wound he inﬂicts upon himself with his
dagger, but the felt pain would have been no more responsible for
his death than his feelings of jealousy were responsible for his
jealous acts.
Whether feelings are causes may also be asked with respect to
external variables. Is massage reinforcing because it feels good? Is
a child reinforced when spinning around because he feels dizzy? Is
taking heroin reinforced by feelings of euphoria? Is shock aversive
because it feels unpleasant? Do we scratch an itch to make it feel
better? Certainly a reinforcer—positive or negative—must be felt in
the simple sense in which a picture must be seen or music heard if
it is to act as a reinforcer. We intensify the effect through active
feeling, as we listen to music or look at pictures, but it is still
possible to distinguish being reinforced from the active or passive
feeling of the reinforcer.
We often ask a person how he feels, and we do so to get useful
information. His answer to “Are you angry with me?” may help us
solve a personal problem. His answer to “Do you feel like going to
the movies?” may affect our decision to invite him to go. In telling
us about his feelings, he reports information which is useful to us
but hitherto available to him alone. Nevertheless, it is not his
feelings which are important but the conditions he feels. In the
early days of research on LSD, it was seriously argued that all
psychiatrists should take the drug in order to see how it feels to be
psychotic. We do not ask the dentist to make his own teeth ache,
however, or choose a heart specialist only among those who have
heart disease. We recognize that what is to be treated is the
condition felt and not the feeling. The traditional view that feelings
are causes makes it hard to take the same view of psychiatry. The
psychiatrist is often regarded as engaged in changing feelings. His
goal is to make an adult patient feel less anxious, or a child to feel
secure. Even so, he changes what is felt.
Young people are said to get into trouble when they do not “feel
wanted,” but it is not the lack of a feeling but the lack of the
contingencies which would generate it which causes trouble.
People who “want” us are people upon whom we have certain
kinds of effects. We develop an extensive repertoire of appropriate

behavior with respect to them. The repertoire languishes if we
break contact. The unwanted person has had no opportunity to
acquire such a repertoire, and he can affect people only in other
ways. He may resort to extreme, possibly quite violent measures in
order to “get through” to people who “do not want him.” We can
change his behavior by reinforcing him in different ways, by making
sure that he gets a response with acceptable means. In doing so,
we may make him “feel wanted,” but that is a collateral result.
The psychiatrist will not, of course, ignore the patient when he
says that he feels like killing himself or, after taking sodium amytal,
that he feels sleepy. It does not follow that he kills himself because
he feels suicidal or goes to sleep because he feels sleepy. Nor
does it follow that the therapist will reduce the likelihood of suicide
or sleep through measures which act directly upon feelings. After
therapy or caffeine, a patient may no longer say that he feels
suicidal or sleepy, because a change has occurred in what is felt.
The feelings of others. Do we not admit that feelings are real
when we attach importance to the feelings of others? We avoid
hurting people because we do not want them to suffer as we
should suffer when similarly treated. We enjoy making people “feel
good,” and we share their pleasure. In this act of showing
sympathy and compassion, we exhibit one of the most admirable
characteristics of our nature and culture. But here again, what we
do or avoid doing concerns the stimuli which are felt. We avoid
stimulating others aversively and are reinforced when we reinforce
them. We do not need to assume that there are ways in which we
directly alter their feelings or, certainly, feel their feelings.
But why should we alter the conditions in others which are felt?
And why does this involve our feelings? How are we in turn
reinforced when we reinforce others? Some answers may seem
cynical. It may be that we feed the hungry not out of compassion,
whatever that means, but because they show their gratitude by
positively reinforcing us or ceasing to act in aversive ways. Quite
apart from whether these reasons are admirable, it may be argued
that they are not powerful; but the answer to that is that few
people do indeed show sympathy or compassion. Very few people
do good to others or avoid being cruel. Many primitive cultures, and
current cultures which have not taken this line, seem to show that
cruelty and indifference are “human nature.” The psychoanalyst
claims to have discovered this in the depths of the human mind.

The responses of a sexual partner have probably been important
to only a small percentage of people. The tenderhearted is
atypical. The feelings of animals are usually taken into account
very late in the development of a culture; most people avoid
hurting only those animals which can hurt them.
In some cultures, nevertheless, it is common for people to rejoice
in the pleasure of others and to suffer when they suffer. To
understand this, we must look at the techniques with which the
culture sets up compassionate behavior of this sort. Men are
punished not only by those they punish but by society in general,
in its concern for the overall reduction of aversive stimuli. To
personal retribution we must add contingencies arranged by the
group, similar to the contingencies which support ethical practices.
The group also reinforces us when we reinforce others; and these
consequences, added to those of gratitude and retribution, not
only maintain compassionate behavior but generate some of the
conditions which are felt as compassion.
This will not explain the fact that what is felt seems to resemble
what is felt by others under the same circumstances, but an
additional cultural technique supplies further information. The
culture may punish grossly aggressive behavior and reward grossly
reinforcing, possibly in terms of topography alone; but more subtle
instances call for some attention to independent variables. As a
culture develops, it becomes more and more difﬁcult to specify
doing good or doing ill in arranging ethical contingencies. A useful
solution to the problem is formulated as the Golden Rule. If a man
is to avoid hurting others, he can learn that what he does hurts by
applying the Golden Rule in its negative form. He is to examine the
effect on himself; he is not to do unto others what would be
aversive if done by others to him.
It is perhaps signiﬁcant that the negative form emerged ﬁrst, but
the positive is soon reached. A man who behaves in ways which
reinforce others is reinforced in turn by the group as well as by the
others. He can discover ways which will have these consequences
by asking himself whether he would be reinforced. The ethical
contingencies which maintain doing good thus lead to an
examination of how one would feel oneself if treated as one
proposes to treat someone else. When we say that in a given
culture a man refrains from hurting someone because he “knows
how it feels to be hurt” we are deﬁning a class of behaviors

suppressed by the culture. When we say that he feeds the hungry
because he knows “how good food tastes when hungry,” we are
referring to a class of approved behaviors.
William James raised the question by asking whether one would
make love to an unfeeling person, and we might ask whether a
sadist would be cruel to such a person. The answer, as a plain
matter of fact, is “Yes”: men occasionally make love to and attack
unfeeling objects and persons. But when the recipients behave in
ways which show feeling, an additional reinforcement is involved.
The torturer restores the victim who has fainted before proceeding
with his torture, and the schoolboy who is being caned deprives
the teacher of part of his reinforcement when he refuses to show
that he is hurt. If by making love we mean stimulating a person in a
given way, we should not make love to an unfeeling person any
more than we would play recorded music to a deaf person or show
a blind person beautiful pictures—even though, if we are
enthusiastic about music or pictures, we may be aware of a
generalized tendency to do so.

Note 8.8

The invasion of privacy

Some recently developed physiological techniques seem to testify
to the reality of private experiences. They seem to provide
independent evidence of what introspective psychologists have
been talking about. Subjective experience has become, so to
speak, an objective fact. But the evidence is important for a
different reason. If events hitherto classiﬁed as private can now be
directly observed by the verbal community, the community can
arrange better contingencies in teaching its members to talk about
them. If an independent indicator of what is felt as anxiety were
available, for example, we could teach a person to report its
presence or absence and to compare it with other things felt. The
new evidence simply points to the fact that what is experienced
introspectively is a physical condition of the body, as a behavioristic
theory of knowledge has always contended.

Note 8.9

Behavior and performance

Santayana, says David Bakan, put Watson in the position of a
spectator at a play. “The inner psychological processes of the
actors are, in effect, nonexistent” (9). But what processes are

existent, in both actor and spectator?
Puppets and marionettes are effective automata even though
the viewer knows about the concealed operator (see Chapter 9).
The actor is a puppet and operator in one skin. He uses his body
to simulate the behavior of another person, moving it directly rather
than by pulling strings. He does so in given ways because, like the
puppeteer, he is under the control of special contingencies of
reinforcement which shape and maintain his behavior. His speech
is simple intraverbal behavior, spoken on cue, and its timing and
expression are controlled by contingencies arranged by the
director. This is all known to the experienced spectator, who
nevertheless enjoys the play.
We are likely to forget how awe-inspiring the speaking of
memorized passages must once have been. The Brahmin priest
reciting one of the Vedas must have seemed to be speaking for
the author, or to be the author. Reading aloud must once have
had a similar effect. Though a text may have been visible to the
listener, reading was still largely a mystery; the reader spoke the
same words as the writer whose transcribed words he was reading.
It did not matter to the listener that he was not uttering sentences
under the control of more important variables. We listen to a poet
reciting or reading a poem of his own even though he has long
since ceased to be the man who wrote it and may indeed merely
be uttering it as intraverbal behavior, as we listen to those who
read the poems of others.
We are not entertained or impressed by puppets, marionettes,
actors, or readers simply because of the topography of their
behavior. We say that the behavior must have meaning or
signiﬁcance, and we mean that independent variables must be
operative in our behavior. The child enjoys seeing Punch beat
Judy when something Judy has said or done predisposes the child
to take similar action. If later parts of a poem are not to some
extent controlled by earlier parts, the poem says nothing we
ourselves are inclined to say, and we stop listening or reading. We
do not watch theatrical representations of purely abstract forms
behaving with respect to each other in no way which resembles
human conduct, nor do we listen long to speech in an unknown
tongue.
Most of the independent variables which induce us to listen and
watch a reader or mime or actor have played a part in our own
history. When these variables are operative, the psychoanalyst

speaks of projection and identiﬁcation. We understand a poem to
the extent that we tend to say it with the poet (141). The simulated
behavior of an actor interests us either because we should behave
in the same way or because we should be curious or surprised or
frightened when someone behaved in that way when we should
not. The actor himself is not beyond the reach of variables of this
kind. He may enter into his role and respond to other characters
and to the setting for reasons other than those established by the
playwright or director.
A recitation, reading, or theatrical presentation simulates human
behavior, which we as listener, reader, or viewer tend to imitate. It
supplies independent variables giving us other reasons for
behaving in the same way, and it is particularly enjoyable when it
does so. (We ourselves read books under similar conditions, of
course.) Simulated topography alone does not reinforce us as we
watch or listen. It is quite incorrect therefore to say that Watson or
any other behavioral scientist regards “human functioning as one
might regard a theatric production” if this means that only
topography of response is at issue. It is equally untrue if it means
that only the independent variables operative in actor or spectator
enter into a scientiﬁc analysis of behavior. As we have seen, it is
not good scientiﬁc practice to explain behavior by appealing to
independent variables which have been inferred from the behavior
thus explained, although this is commonly done, particularly by
psychoanalysts, cognitive theorists, and factor analysts. Nor is it
good scientiﬁc practice to read into topography of response the
variables which might have prompted similar behavior on our own
part. This also is characteristic of almost all branches of psychology
except behaviorism.
The mechanical simulation of behavior raises the same issues in
a clearer form, as we shall see in the next chapter. An unusually
realistic simulation was achieved at a World’s Fair when ﬁgures
were controlled by a computer which had been programmed by
sensing devices attached to the bodies of actors. (Structuralists, by
the way, should be particularly interested in this demonstration.)
Suppose a ﬁgure convincingly acts out “being afraid.” Unless we
are alert to the Formalistic Fallacy, we could easily conclude that
“fear” is to be found somewhere in the program. There is a good
analogy in linguistics. According to some deﬁnitions of the ﬁeld a
collection of tape recordings should contain not only a language,

but everything needed to account for it. A tape recording is,
however, in itself quite meaningless—except to those who speak
the language—just as the simulated ﬁgure will not appear afraid
except to those who have seen similar behavior (perhaps in
themselves) under special kinds of circumstances.
Santayana probably meant that Watson was taking no account
of the feelings of the actors. Actors differ from real people in the
variables which control their behavior, and to the extent that they
feel what they are doing and why they are doing it, they have
different feelings. A behavioral scientist presumably “regards a
theatric production” in a way which depends upon his analysis of
the behavior of the actor. When he analyzes real life, he arrives at
different independent variables. He then “regards human
functioning” in a very different way from that in which he regards a
theatrical production.

Note 8.10

The geography of the mind

One of the more absurd things about the world of the mind is the
space it occupies. It is an inner world and hence observed through
introspection, but one looks at one’s thoughts with an as yet
unidentiﬁed organ. Proprioceptive and interoceptive nerves
respond to private stimuli, but they do not seem appropriate to
visual, auditory, gustatory, and other kinds of mental events, nor
do they seem to be in the right places.
Some thoughts are “superﬁcial”; they come off the top of the
head. Others are on the tip of the tongue. An idea may remain at
the back of one’s mind, but others rise up in consciousness,
ﬂoating to the surface. William James observed ideas passing
through his mind in a steady stream. Unconscious thoughts are out
of sight, but they can come into view, possibly in the manner of
stimulation as it reaches the conscious level. There are mental
effectors as well as receptors, and they operate in the same space.
The cognitive psychologist moves about in his mental world and
manipulates the things in it. He searches his storehouse of memory
for a forgotten word or face and compares it with a word or face
just received from the outside world. He puts ideas aside for the
moment or dismisses them from his mind. He pushes some of them
down into his unconscious where they will no longer bother him.
A mentalistic psychologist may reply that the geography of the
mind is merely a useful metaphor. But why is it useful? What are

the facts which need to be thus metaphorically represented? The
world of the mind was invented, largely by the Greeks, to bring a
person close to the things he sees so that he can know them. The
theory worked fairly well in explaining a man’s knowledge of the
outside world so long as inner copies could be defended. It led to
the mental science of Wundt and Titchner who explored the ways
in which inner copies of reality were produced. It was the rigorous
methodology of introspective psychology which explored the limits
of the usefulness of such copies. Gestalt psychologists and others
interested in perception rather than sensation built upon its failures
—failures which were actually to its credit since they testiﬁed to the
rigor of introspective methods. The end of the story is the long
overdue recognition that what is perceived is after all the external
world.
It was the use of the world of the mind to represent activities
which were not copies of the external world which raised a special
problem. The cognitive and other processes which William James
claimed to observe were not copies of external activities and hence
their status could not be explored in terms of their representational
accuracy. The behavioral processes which are actually at issue are
as much inside the organism as any mental life, but we learn to talk
about them in ways which are much more devious than those with
which we learn to talk about the stimulating environment. It is not
surprising, however, that the geography of the mind should be
borrowed from the geography of the world or that one should be
said to behave mentally in some strange land.

Note 8.11

The death of behaviorism

Sigmund
Koch’s (83) obsequies show an unseemly haste.
Behaviorism, as we know it, will eventually die—not because it is a
failure but because it is a success. As a critical philosophy of
science, it will necessarily change as a science of behavior
changes, and the current issues which deﬁne behaviorism may be
wholly resolved. The basic question is the usefulness of mentalistic
concepts. Efforts have been made to answer it from time to time
simply by ﬁat: we shall not study the nature of the soul but its
manifestations, not the essence of mind but the actions of men, as
Juan Luis Vives (161) put it more than four hundred years ago and
as methodological behaviorists and operational psychologists put it
today. Behavior is thus defined as a field which can be successfully

analyzed apart from the world of mind, but the existence of another
world is admitted, with or without the implication that we can know
about it in some other way.
A radical behaviorism denies the existence of a mental world, not
because it is contentious or jealous of a rival, but because those
who claim to be studying the other world necessarily talk about the
world of behavior in ways which conﬂict with an experimental
analysis. No science of mental life stays within the world of the
mind. Mentalists do not stay on their side of the fence, and
because they have the weight of a long tradition behind them, they
are listened to by nonspecialists.
A radical behaviorism attacks dualistic explanations of behavior
ﬁrst of all to clarify its own scientiﬁc practices, and it must do so
eventually in order to make its contribution to human affairs. As it
increases its power, both as basic science and as the source of a
technology, an analysis of behavior reduces the scope of dualistic
explanations and should eventually dispense with them altogether.
Behaviorism, as an -ism, will then have been absorbed by a
science of behavior. There may always be room for a logic of
science peculiar to such a science, but it will not deal with the
issues which define behaviorism today.
Scientiﬁc formulations do not change the nature of the things
formulated, and a science of behavior neither ignores nor destroys
the phenomena associated with introspection or any other form of
self-observation. It simply represents them in other ways. J. D.
Keehn (79) has denied that behaviorism is dead, particularly in
answering Burt (29), arguing that there is a variety of behaviorism
“that does not deny that men are conscious.” He equates
consciousness with “private experiences,” not as private stimuli in
the present sense, but presumably as private responses to private
stimuli. This is perhaps an acceptable translation of some uses of
“consciousness,” but the term is still dangerous unless other
traditional associations can be avoided. We can indeed examine
the extent to which a verbal community induces the individual to
respond to events with which the community is not in contact, and
our formulation will clarify many traditional problems in the so-called
study of mind, but its principal merit from the present point of view
is that it permits an analysis of what has traditionally been regarded
as a very different kind of stuff.

9

The inside story

Like what the fellow said—In Italy for thirty years under the Borgias
they had warfare, terror, murder, and bloodshed, but they
produced Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, and the Renaissance.
In Switzerland they had brotherly love. They had ﬁve hundred
years of democracy and peace, and what did that produce? The
cuckoo clock!
Thus speaks Orson Welles in the role of a Fascist black marketeer
i n The Third Man. The passage does not appear in Graham
Greene’s novel, published after the ﬁlm, and in a preface Greene
says that Welles added it to the script himself. It is neither good
history nor good logic, but it is a convenient text because it brings
together Michelangelo and the cuckoo clock.

Michelangelo
The “Creation of Adam” in the Sistine Chapel is described by one
art historian (52) in this way: “The space [is] divided into two
masses … Adam … is just awakening, still dreamy, but his physical
perfection is impregnated with latent physical power. The right
shoulder thrust back, the turn of the head, the twist in the torso,
and the bent leg indicate capacity for powerful movement…. The
second group, that of God with his attendant spirits, is full of vigor
and movement. These two contrasting masses … are uniﬁed by
the wonderful connecting link of the two hands, each marvelously
expressive of the mood of its possessor—Adam’s limp and lifeless,
God’s tense with active power. The touch of ﬁnger to ﬁnger is the
act of creation.”
Another interpretation is possible. Michelangelo has portrayed
Adam as a cadaver. The body lies against a hillside, the right
shoulder shored by the upper half of the right arm. The head tilts
backward pulling on the neck tendons. The left foot is wedged
under the right leg so that the left knee can support the extended
left arm. The hand is indeed “limp and lifeless.” Adam’s body is
complete but not yet alive; it is structure without function. But
across the gap between the two ﬁngers will pass the Spark of Life
—that mysterious thing which enters the body when a fetus
quickens and leaves it when a man dies. When Adam’s body

receives Life, it will move. It will act without being acted upon; the
heart will beat and the lungs will breathe spontaneously.
In the scientiﬁc view, nothing crosses the gap. Form does not
wait to receive its function. Life on earth began when certain
complex molecules came into being. They did not have to be
invested with a vital principle or essence; they were alive as soon
as they existed. If Adam’s body were complete, it would be alive.
When a fetus quickens or a man dies, the change in function is
more conspicuous than any change in structure, but we must
suppose that structure changes.
Across the gap also jumps the Spark of Mind, and the living body
then not only moves but moves appropriately with respect to the
world around it. Mind has a much more complex role to play than
Life. It must be more than the function which invests structure
because it must reach into the environment if it is to explain the
complex adjustment of the organism to contingencies of
reinforcement. In early theories, the role was played by another
person who was believed to enter the body and take control. This
was in line with a primitive notion of causality: things moved
because one moved them, and if other things moved, it was
because someone else moved them. The gods were personiﬁed
movers. As a man might blow a feather, so Boreas blew the
branches of trees. As a man might make a noise when angry, so
an angry Jove made the noise called thunder. Big things called for
big movers, but the gods were also credited with lesser
happenings: when Apollo threw a quoit and accidentally killed
Hyacinthus, it was because a jealous Zephyrus blew the quoit out
of its path. It was not necessary to impute motives—a poltergeist
could make aimless noises—but the gods who explained the
vagaries of human behavior usually acted for human reasons. Two
great sets of reasons—good and evil—were particularly important.
Some spirits gave a man a chance to do good and even told him
what to do. He asked them for guidance, interpreted chance
remarks as signs from them, and generated signs through
divination. (Primitive man could whirl a rhomb until an unseen spirit
spoke to him through its murmuring hum.) Other spirits put
temptation in a man’s way and told him to be bad, and he resisted
by putting them behind him, wrestling with them, or throwing ink
pots at them.
Agents of this sort were outside the person they acted upon but,
as the metaphor of the Spark Gap suggests, they could go inside.

Sometimes they were useful (the poet’s Muse helped in the
composition of a poem), but more often they caused trouble. The
possessing demon was usually a mischief maker. Exorcism is still
not uncommon, and a remnant survives when we say “God bless
you” to a man who has sneezed. Montaigne said he crossed
himself even when he yawned, and other reﬂex actions, such as
hiccupping, vomiting, coughing, and shivering, have suggested
alien actors. Possession is a useful theory when the indwelling
spirit can be blamed for otherwise punishable behavior. Casanova
told of a young girl who malingered as possessed, partly to enjoy
the attentions of an attractive young exorcist but partly to do as
she pleased, blaming her conduct on the devil within her. Causal
agents were said to go inside inanimate things, too; but it was easy
for physical science to dispossess them as soon as better
explanations were at hand. Alternative explanations of human
behavior have not been so successful, in part because what is
explained bears a confusing resemblance to what is said to explain
it.
When supernatural aspects have been abandoned, the
character and role of demon and muse do not differ greatly from
those of the man whose behavior they explain. Minor adjustments
may need to be made. Behavior may suggest an indwelling animal
rather than a man (some outdwelling gods were also
therianthropic), and we reverse the relation when we say that some
animals are “almost human.” A person who behaves in markedly
different ways at different times is said to have multiple
personalities—one or more of whom, mythology suggests, may be
nonhuman. The Freudian Superego, Ego, and Id are multiple Inner
Men who struggle with each other, the outcome determining the
behavior of the body they inhabit. The Self is a softened version.
When a man sets an alarm clock at night to wake himself in the
morning, the man who sets the clock differs very little from the man
who is awakened, but when a man “struggles to control himself”—
say, in anger—we are likely to think of different personalities.
As all these examples show, the Inner Man is most often invoked
when the behavior to be explained is unusual, fragmentary, or
beyond control—unusual with respect to other parts of a man’s
behavior, fragmentary with respect to his behavior as a whole, and
beyond the control of the rest of him as a person.1 But the “rest of
him” must also be explained, and when all parts have been

assembled, the Inner Man behaves very much like the Outer.
Nothing has been gained by this animistic practice because the
Inner Man still calls for explanation. Indeed, we now face all our
original problems in a much more difﬁcult form. It is surprising that
psychologists permit their task to be set forth in this troublesome
way.
We dispossess the Inner Man by replacing him with genetic and
environmental variables. To avoid sneezing we ward off, not a
devil, but the pepper. We trace multiple personalities to multiple
contingencies of reinforcement (135). We replace the Superego
and Id of Freud as well as the Conscience and Old Adam of
Judeo-Christian theology with “good” and “evil” phylogenic and
ontogenic contingencies. Teachers and therapists do not change
personalities, they change the world in which students and patients
live. Some problems in the dispossession of the Inner Man deserve
a more detailed discussion, however.

Cognitive man
The Inner Man is often said to store and recall memories. His
behavior in doing so is much like that of the Outer Man when he
makes records and puts them aside to be used at a later date.
Primitive man marked locations and paths so that he could later
ﬁnd or follow them. Not-so-primitive man counted things and tallied
numbers on clay tablets so that he would not need to count them
again. With the invention of the alphabet men could record
agreements and contracts so that they could use them in future
negotiations, and historical events so that they could read about
them later. They set down useful rules and directions to be
followed when occasion arose. In doing all this, they created
physical objects which could serve as stimuli. They labeled them so
that they could find them again and put them aside in a convenient
place, and they thus improved the chances that they would later
behave in ways which were likely to be reinforced.
If the Outer Man can do all this, why not the Inner? But how can
the Inner Man do it? With what organs can he receive stimuli and
make copies of them? Of what stuff are the copies made? In what
space does he store them? How does he label them so that he
can ﬁnd them again? How does he scan the labels in the
storehouse of memory to ﬁnd a particular copy? (The cognitive
metaphor is often felt to be supported by the analogy of the

computer, which does indeed receive, store, and retrieve
information, but the computer simply does what men used to do
much less conveniently with clay tablets, and like them it does it in
physical space).
We shall not put Cognitive Man in good order by discovering the
space in which he works, for it is the work which is the bad
metaphor. A man need not copy the stimulating environment in
order to perceive it, and he need not make a copy in order to
perceive it in the future. When an organism exposed to a set of
contingencies of reinforcement is modiﬁed by them and as a result
behaves in a different way in the future, we do not need to say
that it stores the contingencies. What is “stored” is a modiﬁed
organism, not a record of the modifying variables.
We learn the name of an object by reading the label attached to
it, and we can then name the object when asked to do so. Later
we shall have to “recall” the name, perhaps with some difﬁculty.
What we recall or reinstate is a response, not a copy of the label
which we then read. The conditions which are said to determine
the accessibility of stored memories really determine the
accessibility of responses. It is not surprising that common verbal
stimuli are more easily recalled than rare (as they are more easily
seen in an unclear text) because common responses are more
likely to be emitted than rare. Verbal stimuli which are easily
recalled because they have been efﬁciently labeled are responses
which are under effective control of the stimuli which are said to
prompt their recall. Mnemonic systems and other devices for the
efﬁcient storage of experiences simply provide for the acquisition of
easily recalled responses.
A rather similar physical analogy underlies the metaphor of
memory when we recall things we are not looking for. Just as we
construct memoranda to improve future contingencies to which we
can then respond in practical ways, so we construct memorials
which remind us of persons or things. A memorial, like a
memorandum, is often a rough copy of a stimulus in lieu of which it
functions, but when we are reminded of something without the help
of a memorial, we have no reason to suppose that we are looking
at a mental copy. When we are suddenly reminded of a name, the
name does not “pop out” of our memory as a stimulus to which we
then respond but as a response similar to the response we once
made.
Some activities of Cognitive Man cannot be interpreted as

metaphors in this sense because there are no behavioral parallels.
When an organism responds differently to two stimuli, we say that it
discriminates between them, but “discrimination,” often said to be
one of the activities of Cognitive Man, is not itself behavior.
Generalizing, abstracting, and forming concepts are other things in
the cognitive repertoire which must be analyzed in a different way
at the level of behavior. A behavioral analysis of thinking never
comes very close to cognition. A man may act in a way which
suggests that he has had an idea, but the behavior is merely the
result of the supposed cognitive activity, not an objective version.
Jules Henry has reported (64) that the Kaingang Indians “shout at
thunderstorms to make them go away,” and he notes that “the
continuance of the shouting is guaranteed by the fact that sudden
squalls always go away.” The contingencies are not unlike those in
which a hungry pigeon is given food periodically by a clockwork
mechanism. In
pigeon
and
Indian
alike, adventitious
reinforcements generate ritualistic behavior. (The Indian is more
likely to show generalization from other contingencies, since
shouting at a thunderstorm resembles shouting at men or animals
who do then withdraw.) Henry insists, however, that the idea of
shouting must have come ﬁrst. It “was an invention—an idea.” This
is a gratuitous assumption, and it causes trouble because we
cannot explain the invention of a superstitious idea as easily as we
explain the appearance of superstitious behavior.
The ﬁeld of paleobehavior has never been carefully explored,
but it is not impossible to imagine natural “programs” which, given a
hundred thousand years, could teach early men to dig with a stick,
make a ﬁre, and plant and cultivate foods. Comparable programs
can be investigated experimentally—for example, in young
children. The traditional view that the idea of digging with a stick, or
making a ﬁre, or planting and cultivating food must have occurred
ﬁrst offers no comparable opportunity for experimental
investigation.
All semblance of an inner person is lost when behavior is traced
to qualities, traits, essences, virtues, and abilities. A similar practice
could survive for a long time in physical science without exciting
ridicule. We are still likely to say that a metal can be hammered into
shape because it is malleable or possesses the property of
malleability. Nevertheless, Newton was aware of the danger: “To
tell us that every species of things is endowed with an occult

speciﬁc quality by which it acts and produces manifest effects is to
tell us nothing.” The mistake is to take the occult quality seriously.
There is no harm in saying that an object ﬂoats or sinks because of
its speciﬁc gravity, so long as we recognize that the term simply
refers to certain relations. There is no harm in saying that a student
gets high marks because of his intelligence or plays the piano well
because of his musical ability, or that a politician takes bribes
because of his greed or runs for ofﬁce because of his ambition, so
long as we recognize that we are “explaining” one instance of
behavior simply by pointing to other instances presumably
traceable to the same, though unidentiﬁed, variables. We say that
a man is tall and strong and that he possesses height and
strength, but we do not then say that he is tall because of his
height or strong because of his strength. A trait may be useful in
directing our attention to a variable responsible for a class of
behaviors, but the variable is the thing to study. A great many traits
point to ontogenic contingencies of reinforcement, but phylogenic
contingencies are important in “human nature.”

The power of the inside story
We could rewrite all these versions of the Inside Story in terms of
behavior while conﬁning ourselves to phylogenic and ontogenic
contingencies, but it must be admitted that something would be
lost. Eric Knight’s charming story (82) of a dog’s valiant struggle to
ﬁnd her way back to the boy who once owned her would lose a
great deal if references to “the time sense” which “drove at
[Lassie’s] brain and muscles,” the “impulse” which “warned her
faintly” of danger, or “the desire for her true home” which “began to
waken” were deleted. Dostoevski’s Crime and Punishment or
George Eliot’s Middlemarch could be rewritten without mentioning
guilt, ambition, strivings, or fears, but readers would no doubt
prefer the original versions. The maxims of La Rochefoucauld can
be “translated into behavior,” but most of their profundity is lost.
Why is the Inside Story so moving, so convincing, and so
satisfying?
We look inside the body for something more substantial than
“historical” variables. We want to bridge the temporal and spatial
gaps between behavior and the variables of which it is a function.
When we reinforce an organism on Monday and see the effect on
Tuesday, it is reassuring to suppose that Monday’s reinforcement

produced knowledge which survived until Tuesday or a memory
which could be recalled on Tuesday. When we take away all food
on Monday and observe voracious eating on Tuesday, it is
reassuring to suppose that the deprivation has slowly built up a
hunger drive.
It is not just a matter of ﬁlling a gap, however. An independent
variable never quite seems like a cause; it does not seem to do
anything. We look for something more energetic. We tend to speak
of variables as forces. Phylogenic contingencies seem more
substantial if we call them “selection pressure.“ The behavior of a
man reinforced on a drh schedule seems more convincingly
described by saying that he is working under “pressure of time.” A
variable-ratio schedule, effectively programmed, produces a
pathological gambler, but the program passes into history while he
is still gambling and we are likely to say that he continues to
gamble because of the excitement, or to gain a sense of mastery
(when he wins), or to punish himself (when he loses). We also give
external variables dynamic touches. Nolentem fata trahunt,
volentem ducunt (“The fates drag the unwilling and lead the
willing”). A translation, which might read, “Reinforcement may be
positive or negative and we say that a man behaves willingly under
the ﬁrst and unwillingly under the second,” contains no term as
forceful as “drag” or “lead.”
We also turn to the Inside Story when the Outside Story is
incomplete. As we have seen, the cognitive processes supposedly
taking place in the “black box” are designed to patch up a
defective input-output formulation. Psycholinguists try to justify
cognitive theorizing on the grounds that “learning theory” cannot
account for the appearance of sentences in the behavior of
children.2 Current analyses of verbal contingencies are no doubt
still incomplete, but what is gained by appealing to cognitive
processes? If new sentences cannot arise in behavior, how can
they arise in the mind? It is no answer to say that they arise when
the child applies grammatical or syntactical rules (with what organs,
in what space?), because the same rules can be applied to
behavior (with known organs, in physical space). Nor can we
answer by appealing to the innate structure of the mind, because
behavior is also innately structured. The implied answer is much
simpler: the very nature of the mind is to do what the body cannot
do. The body must obey physical laws and cannot therefore

perform miracles. The mind has a long animistic tradition of being
able to do so.
(The miracle may have theological overtones. A man’s hand is
moved by a simple physical cause which, said Cardinal Newman
[107], may be studied by physics and physiology, but it is merely
an assumption that the motive cause is physical. Similarly, “… if a
people prays, and the wind changes, the rain ceases, the sun
shines, and the harvest is safely housed … our Professor may …
consult the barometer, discourse about the atmosphere …; but
should he proceed to rest the phenomenon … simply upon a
physical cause, to the exclusion of a divine … I must tell him Ne
sutor ultra crepidam: he is making his particular craft usurp and
occupy the universe…. If the creature is ever setting in motion an
endless series of physical causes and effects, much more is the
Creator.”)
Lastly, the Inside Story fascinates just because it is a deep dark
secret. Much of the interest in the ﬁeld of perception, for example,
is due to an element of mystery. When stimuli are the same but
responses differ, or when stimuli are different but the responses
the same, we are likely to feel that something inside is needed to
explain the discrepancies. We have exhausted a physical account
(provided we have ignored past contingencies of reinforcement)
and must therefore turn to a mental account—which is much more
intriguing. If we study racial prejudice, for example, by giving a
subject pictures of black and white people and comparing the times
he spends in looking at them, the result adds to the facts with
which we started but would not explain them. If, however, we
arrange for our subject to see a picture of a black person with one
eye and a picture of a white person with the other and if we
compare the times during which each is dominant in retinal rivalry,
the result seems closer to the roots of prejudice. It is not for
nothing that psychoanalysis is called “depth psychology” or that
linguists look for the “deep structure” of a sentence. And it is
perhaps inevitable that an analysis of the same behavior in terms
of contingencies of reinforcement will seem superﬁcial. But those
who believe they are looking into the depths usually try to bring
things to the surface, and we can reach the surface most readily by
starting there.

The nervous system

Why not simply look inside the organism to discover what is going
on when it displays evidences of mind? The introspective
philosopher and psychologist claim, of course, to do so, but their
“look” has a special meaning. With what organs do they look at
themselves, and how much can they see? The techniques of the
physiologist seem much more promising. There is no doubt of the
existence of sense organs, nerves, and brain, or of their
participation in behavior. The organism is neither empty nor
inscrutable; let the black box be opened.
The body has always seemed to offer an attractive escape from
the problems of mind. La Mettrie saw that his physical condition
affected his thinking, and Cabanis and other eighteenth-century
materialists discussed the relations between the physical and moral
aspects of human behavior. Thought was possibly only one of the
workings of the body. Possibly the brain secreted thought as the
liver secreted bile. And so, today, when a mentalistic theory grows
murky or unconvincing, it is tempting to reﬂect that it is after all
simply a matter of the way in which the brain functions. Freud was
free to speculate with great abandon because, as a strict
determinist, he believed that a physiological substrate would
eventually be discovered. And when mentalism grows politically
dangerous because it may be mistaken for idealism, it is reassuring
to speak only of “higher nervous activities.”
Physiological Man was invoked to explain human behavior long
before the functions of organs were correctly identiﬁed. Generosity
was attributed to a large heart, and depression to an excess of
black bile (“melancholia”). Hunger was easily traced to the stomach,
but room for speculation remained. In 1668 John Mayow (99)
suggested that “if the stomach be quite empty of food, its internal
membranes are, as is possible, pinched by the nitroaerial particles,
and hunger seems to arise from this.” Cervantes contended that
Don Quixote’s troubles were neurological. His brain was
“distempered,” “out of order,” “turned topsy-turvy,” and “dried out.”
(“By sleeping little and reading much, the moisture of his brain was
exhausted to that degree that at last he lost the use of his
reason.”) His uncle’s brains were cracked.
Cervantes may have been poking fun at physiology, but if so, we
have not learned the lesson. We still say that we must use our
brains to succeed, and we rack our brains (not our minds) for a
fresh idea or a forgotten memory. We wonder whether bigger

brains might not mean greater intelligence, and we call a stupid
man addlebrained or soft in the head. “Nerves” are metaphorical
too, but the metaphor is confounded by the fact that νεῦρον
meant tendon as well as nerve. When we say that a man’s nerves
are taut, on edge, strained, or jumpy, we may be talking about his
tendons, but we are probably using metaphors when we describe
the man as nervous (though he presumably has no more nerves
than anyone else) or subject to attacks of nerves, or when we give
him credit for living on his nerve or having the nerve to speak up or
challenge the world.
Professional theories of the nervous system are restricted in
scope by the available facts. We cannot plausibly speak of circuits
or centers or cell assemblies which do not conform to observed
anatomy, or propose a chemical theory of memory if the required
molecules are not to be found in the brain. But room for
speculation remains, and it is still tempting to take refuge in an
unquestionably physical, if necessarily poorly understood, system.
Rather than attack mentalistic concepts by examining the behavior
which is said to be explained by them, the physiologist is likely to
retain the concepts and search for their physical bases. A recent
article in a scientiﬁc journal on the visual space sense asserts that
“the ﬁnal event in the chain from the retina to the brain is a psychic
experience.” Another reports research on “the brain and its
contained mind.” Another is entitled “Mind and Molecules.” A
distinguished group of physiologists have participated in a
symposium on “Brain and Conscious Experience.”
The unhappy result is that physiologists usually look into the
black box for the wrong things. The telephone switchboard is no
longer in favor, but the computer is more than an adequate
replacement. Physiologists follow the stimulus through the body in
its various transformations, searching for those inner copies of the
world to be equated with experience and those stored copies
which are retrieved as memories. They look for patterns in “brain
waves” associated with having ideas and making decisions. The
physiological activities which account for the functional relations
demonstrated in an experimental analysis of behavior tend,
therefore, to be neglected.
It would be easiest to see how physiological and behavioral facts
are related if we had a complete account of a behaving organism—
of both the observable behavior and the physiological processes
occurring at the same time. We should then know what it means to

say that some part of such an account “explains” another part. (We
should not be likely to say that any two parts reveal the “double
aspect” of anything.) The organism would be seen to be a unitary
system, its behavior clearly part of its physiology. At the moment,
however, physiological techniques are limited, and we cannot study
everything at once. We can show only that physiological processes
observed upon one occasion have properties which plausibly
account for behavior observed upon another, possibly in another
organism. Hence, we cannot be sure that physiological facts
explain behavior until behavior has been exhaustively analyzed. A
successful independent experimental analysis of behavior is a
necessary half of any “physiological explanation.”
The requirement is not always recognized by those who try to tell
the physiological Inside Story. On the contrary, it is often implied
that behavior cannot be adequately described until more is known
about the nervous system. A science of behavior is called “highly
phenomenological” and is said to show a “studied indifference to
brain mechanisms—to what is inside the black box.” But we cannot
say that what goes on inside is an adequate explanation until we
know what the black box does. A behavioral analysis is essentially
a statement of the facts to be explained by studying the nervous
system. It tells the physiologist what to look for. The converse does
not hold. We can predict and control behavior without knowing how
our dependent and independent variables are connected.
Physiological discoveries cannot disprove an experimental analysis
or invalidate its technological advances.
This is not to question the importance of physiology in a science
of behavior. In a more advanced account of a behaving organism
“historical” variables will be replaced by “causal.” When we can
observe the momentary state of an organism, we shall be able to
use it instead of the history responsible for it in predicting behavior.
When we can generate or change a state directly, we shall be able
to use it to control behavior. Neither the science nor the technology
of behavior will then vanish, however. Physiological manipulations
will simply be added to the armamentarium of the behavioral
scientist. Pharmacology has already foreshadowed this state of
affairs. A drug changes an organism in such a way that it behaves
differently. We may have been able to make the same change by
manipulating standard environmental variables, but the drug now
permits us to circumvent that manipulation. Other drugs may yield

entirely new effects. They are used as environmental variables.
The physiological processes which mediate behavior do not, so
far as we know, differ from those involved in other functions of a
living organism. The activities which testify to the presence of Mind
are simply part of those which testify to the presence of Life.

The cuckoo clock
Can the Inside Story be written in another way? Instead of looking
inside to see what crossed the gap when man was created, why
not build a machine that behaves like a man and see what must be
put into it to make it work? The question brings us back to the
cuckoo clock. It is perhaps the most familiar of all automata: as the
hour strikes, a door opens and a bird moves into view; it lifts its
wings, opens its beak, moves its tongue, bobs rhythmically, and
utters an appropriate number of minor thirds. It offers a useful
service to those who cannot see the clock and an amusing
spectacle to those who can.
As Life explains movement, so movement means Life, and
machines which seem alive because they move without being
moved have a long history. Early examples were probably invented
to mystify or frighten, and even when they came to be designed to
amuse, something of the mysterious or frightening may have
survived. A wooden pigeon that could ﬂy is said to have been
invented as early as 400 B.C., and at the beginning of the Christian
era Hero of Alexandria constructed animated theatrical
representations. The more complex the behavior, the more
impressive the toy. Eighteenth- and nineteenth-century automata
included a lady who played the harpsichord, each ﬁnger moving
independently, and a boy who dipped his pen in ink and wrote
“Soyez les bienvenus à Neuchatel” (97). Speech has always
seemed peculiarly human. A small reed organ in the belly of a doll
says Ma-ma, and a device which spoke recognizable words was
invented as early as 1791. It has its modern electronic
counterparts.
Machines which not only simulate the topography of behavior but
respond appropriately to environmental variables are particularly
impressive. A mechanical mouse may frighten or amuse as it runs
along the ﬂoor, but it is especially fascinating when it turns back
from the edge of a table (thanks to an unseen transverse wheel).
The hydraulic devices in the Royal Fountains in France which

suggested to Descartes the principle of the stimulus were
distinguished by the fact that they behaved appropriately. “[The
ladies and gentlemen of the court] tred on certain tiles or plates
which are so disposed that if they approach a bathing Diana they
cause her to hide in the rose bushes, and if they try to follow her
they cause a Neptune to come forward to meet them, threatening
them with his trident” (see 124). The magnet (which Thales felt
must have a soul because it could move iron) is useful in simulating
appropriate movement. Rousseau (118) described a duck ﬂoating
in a bowl of water which approached when a bit of bread was held
toward it. (When the exhibitor allowed Rousseau to hold the bread,
the duck went away. Rousseau inferred that a child beneath the
table was using another magnet, but the exhibitor may have
reversed the poles of the magnet in the bread. Several mechanical
puzzles, including a mummy which in the hands of a naive operator
refuses to stay in its sarcophagus, are based on that principle.)
Machines which appear to solve problems or think for themselves
in other ways are presumably in the forefront of the art. One of the
ﬁrst and possibly the most famous was the chess player invented
by von Kempelen in 1770 and later exhibited by Maelzel of
metronome fame. Although a human player was suspected, and
various theories proposed to explain how he escaped detection
when the inner mechanism was exposed to the public, the secret
was kept for seventy years (59).
Verisimilitude is not essential. A ﬂoating magnet behaves
amusingly even when it does not look like a duck. A clock which
strikes the hour is useful even when a bellringer is not simulated.
The giant crane or earthmover is fascinating even though it does
not look like a living thing. In Maelzel’s device a ﬁgure dressed in
the fashionable Turkish style of the day moved the pieces, but a
chess-playing computer does not look like a chess player at all. It
learns of the moves of its opponent and announces its own moves
in its own way, to which its opponent must adjust. Topography of
behavior essentially vanishes in the mathematical model, an ideal
machine whose behavioral processes are like those of animals and
men only in the sense that they can be described with the same
equations.
If we disregard verisimilitude, we can say that automata do
indeed behave very much like men. They detect, identify, and
classify stimuli. They store and retrieve information. They learn and
teach. They solve problems and play games. They behave as

members of a social system, in which other members may or may
not be machines. We treat them as men, “instructing them” and
“asking them questions,” and we listen to their answers. We even
do what they tell us to do. They are certainly almost human, and
since we know why they behave as they do, do we not know what
it means to possess a Mind?

The ghost in the machine
We must ﬁrst be sure that there is no Little Man inside. A familiar
toy pig seems alive because it moves its ears and tail, but it does
so thanks to an imprisoned ﬂy. The doors of an ancient Egyptian
temple seemed to open by themselves, but they were probably
moved by men concealed on a lower level. An early “horseless
carriage” had four large spokeless wheels, in each of which a man
walked as on a treadmill. (The fraud was exposed by putting
pepper in the wheels.) The voice of the oracle of Orpheus on the
isle of Lesbos was a human voice delivered through a pipe, and a
modern doll says much more than “Ma-ma” thanks to a recording of
real speech.
Mechanical simulations remain awesome and mystifying even
when the presence of a living operator is known. The dragons
which wind through the streets in a festival are obviously moved by
men, and so are marionettes and puppets, and they still impress
and amuse. But if we wish to argue that a machine genuinely
behaves like a man, we must make sure that no man is involved.
There was, of course, a human operator in Maelzel’s chess player.
(The soul of the magnet, incidentally, contributed to his success
and proved a formidable obstacle to those who tried to discover
the secret. Small magnets in the bases of the chessmen moved
tell-tales on the underside of the board to show the concealed
player where his opponent has moved.) No man is concealed in a
computer when it is playing chess, but important contributions from
human players have been stored in it. The computer, even with its
great speed, does not have time to test the consequences of
every move. It can play chess reasonably well only if it has been
programmed to evaluate positions a few moves ahead, and the
systems of evaluation it uses “correspond to the various features
that chess players assert are important” or “follow the common and
tested lore of the chess world.”
There is a homunculus in any machine built and instructed by

men, and his role throws light on the hypothetical Inner Man of
traditional theories. A machine is, by deﬁnition, a human product; it
is, etymologically, a means to an end. We design machines to work
for us, to do what we should otherwise have to do ourselves, and
to do it more rapidly and effectively. Some of the conspicuous
gains ﬁt a stimulus-response formula. Devices which are sensitive
to new kinds or very small amounts of energy or which can respond
to large amounts without danger amplify and extend stimulation.
Other devices amplify the reach, power, speed, subtlety, and
complexity of responses. Human achievements then become
possible which are no doubt remarkable, but no particular awe or
mystery attaches to them. The radio-telescope is a hand cupped
behind the ear; the earthmover is a digging stick.
It is only when machines seem to take over central processes
that we grow uneasy. When they select stimuli, identify patterns,
convert stimuli into forms more suitable for processing, categorize
data, extract concepts, and follow problem-solving strategies, they
perform functions which in man are attributed to Mind. And the
functions are not trivial. One expert in computer simulation, as Eliot
Hearst has pointed out (61), “was at one time so optimistic … that
he predicted that a digital computer would be world [chess]
champion within ten years.” But the real question is not whether
machines think but whether men do. The mystery which surrounds
a thinking machine already surrounds a thinking man. We can
dispose of it in both cases by extending our analysis of
contingencies of reinforcement. The distinction between rulegoverned and contingency-shaped behavior (Chapter 6) is crucial.
Computer simulation is often defended on the ground that it
forces the simulator to analyze behavior. If a computer is to
engage in trial-and-error learning, it must be programmed to try
efﬁciently. If it is to make decisions, it must be programmed to
evaluate outcomes. If it is to play games, it must be programmed to
follow useful strategies. The programs are useful to men as well as
computers. Newell, Shaw, and Simon (106) have said, for example,
that “if one could devise a successful chess machine, one would
seem to have penetrated to the core of human intellectual
endeavor,” but they add that “any information processing system …
that plays chess successfully will use heuristics generically similar to
those used by humans.”
All these examples have to do with rule-governed behavior. A
problem or game is a set of contingencies of reinforcement, and

one way to solve or play it successfully is to extract appropriate
rules. It is not the only way, however. As Newell, Shaw, and Simon
say, “Man can solve problems without knowing how he solves
them.” In other words, his behavior can be shaped by
contingencies which he has not analyzed. When the authors
continue, “Let us simply assume that it is good to know how to do
mechanically what man can do naturally,” we may take natural to
mean contingency-shaped and mechanical to mean rule-governed.
In other words, it is good to extract rules from contingencies so that
we can avoid the possibly prolonged process of being shaped by
the contingencies.
But rule-governed behavior is not the same as contingencyshaped, even when it is topographically similar and equally
successful, and this explains why all the things said to be lacking in
problem-solving machines are also said to be lacking in rulegoverned behavior in man. A person who solves a problem simply
by following algorithmic rules behaves “mechanically”; unlike the
“intuitive” thinker he has not been touched by the unanalyzed
contingencies. As science becomes more and more rule-governed,
the behavior of the scientist loses the personal touch of
contingency-shaped behavior, as Polanyi and Bridgman have
complained, and may not seem to show the genuine possession of
knowledge.
A difference in purpose follows (see page 106). As Neisser (105)
says, “It is difﬁcult not to be impressed with the ‘homing missile,’
which pursues its target tenaciously through every evasive action,
until it achieves its destructive goal. On the intellectual level, the
‘Logic Theorist’ of Newell, Simon, and Shaw … is just as persistent:
determined to prove a theorem, it tries one logical strategy after
another until the proof is found or until its resources are
exhausted…. Machines are evidently more purposive than most
human beings, most of the time.” But there is something wrong with
this, and Neisser tries to identify it by saying that machine purpose
is “monolithic.” But that is not the fault of the machine; machines
are usually built and programmed for only one purpose at a time. A
child playing checkers may avoid the loss of a piece “by every
possible maneuver, including removing it from the board and
putting it in his mouth,” and he seems more than a monolithic
machine because he does; but a checker-playing computer could
be programmed to preserve or capture pieces in more than one

way—by following the rules of the game or by taking them off the
board when the opponent was not looking. It is our monolithic
human purpose which explains why a machine plays checkers in
only one way at a time.
A real difference in purpose between men and machines
resembles one of the differences between rule-governed and
contingency-shaped behavior in men. The reinforcers which induce
men to follow rules may be quite unrelated to the reinforcers in the
contingencies from which the rules are drawn. Compare two men
walking from Grand Central Terminal to Central Park, one of whom
“knows New York” while the other has never been in New York
before and is following a map. Both may take the same route and,
apart from the behavior of consulting the map, behave in much the
same way—but for different “reasons.” Both are perhaps reinforced
by the same consequences upon arriving in Central Park, but the
events which reinforce their responses at each turn differ. For the
man who knows New York, they are conditioned reinforcers derived
from the ultimate consequences; he makes a turn and ﬁnds himself
in a street which is the occasion for further walking toward Central
Park. The man who is following a map makes a turn and ﬁnds
himself in a street which is “right” according to the map; he is
reinforced by this because of the instructions or advice which led
him to follow it. The distinction is important when the culture
reinforces behavior in order to bring remote consequences to bear
on its members. We recognize a substantial difference in purpose
when a man responds to ethical sanctions or obeys the law simply
to escape punitive consequences and when he responds because
to some extent he has been affected by the natural advantages of
an orderly society. Machines are law-abiding citizens; they always
follow rules.
The mistake, as we saw in Chapter 5, is to regard purpose as a
characteristic or essence of the topography of behavior rather than
as a relation to controlling variables. A similar issue concerns
meaning. A machine may behave like a man but its behavior may
still be called meaningless. So may that of a man who is
mechanically following directions. A machine—say, a tape recorder
—does not “mean what it says,” but neither does a man who is
reciting a passage learned entirely by rote, possibly in a tongue
unknown to him. A listener may respond meaningfully to the
recording or to the recitation, but only with respect to the original
source. A transmitter is limited in important ways and its

shortcomings may be resented: “Six to eight inches of snow,
according to the telephone weather service. I don’t know whether
that includes what we have already had, and of course the
recorded voice didn’t know either.” Nor would a living operator who
was simply reading or reciting a message from the weather bureau.
What is resented is the lack of collateral behavior. A book is a
mechanical transmission of verbal behavior, and Socrates objected
to it on the same grounds: one cannot ask it questions. But a book
does not sound like or look like, and hence does not “pretend to
be,” a living person; and it cannot therefore be accused of sham or
fraud. If the telephone weather service used a code—for example,
a sustained tone for fair, a wobbly tone for cloudy, a drum roll for
rain—we should accept this as readily as we accept storm warnings
along the coast. We accept the word of a simulated cuckoo
because we do not interact with cuckoos in other ways, but a clock
which intoned, “Nine o’clock and all is well,” would be resented.
(Collateral responses are lacking in what may be called receptive
automata. Children talk to and play with dolls, and grown men have
been known to live with mannikins, but their behavior falls far short
of that emitted with respect to real people. The Goncourt brothers
reported the arrest of a man who constructed a particularly
receptive female “à l’usage des communautés religieuses ou bien
des riches navigateurs” (55, entry for 6 May, 1858), a device which
recalls William James’ question whether we would make love to a
nonfeeling person. Except for the extent of the responses they
permit, these receptive automata do not differ essentially from
portraits or statues, with respect to which we also behave in
fragmentary ways appropriate to real people.)
The search for meaning in the structure of behavior and the
rejection of simulated topography on the ground that it lacks
meaning has a bearing on the issue of reductionism. In a paper
called “On Comparing the Brain with Machines” D. M. MacKay (96)
argues as follows:
If I say that an electric advertising sign is “nothing-but” a certain array of lamps and wires,
I may mean one of two things: (1) I may mean that an electrician could make a complete
catalogue of all that is there, and have nothing left over, without mentioning “the
advertisement.” This is true. (2) Or I may mean that since there is nothing left over from the
electrician’s account, there isn’t really an advertisement there at all. This is the error of
reductionism. It consists in confusing exhaustiveness with exclusiveness. The electrician’s
account is exhaustive, at least in the sense that a perfect replica could be constructed from it.

But the electrician’s account and the advertiser’s account of “all that is there” are not mutually
exclusive. The advertisement is not something to be ﬁtted into a gap in the electrician’s
account. It is something that we ﬁnd when we start all over again to describe what is there in
another complementary language.

The appeal to a “complementary language” savors of the
Formalistic Fallacy. A complete acoustical description does not
reveal “all that is there” in a verbal response, no matter what
language it uses, because other variables must be taken into
account. On the side of a verbal stimulus, meaning is not to be
found in its acoustic properties but in its effects on a listener. To
improve our prediction of its effects, we should learn more about
the listener, not about the verbal stimulus. Similarly, an
“advertisement” is not a physical property of a sign, and no physical
analysis will permit us to predict its effect upon those who see it.
Yet it is this effect which makes it an advertisement. To reduce its
effects as a stimulus to its physical properties is not reductionism; it
is the impossible aspiration of structuralism.
A similar issue concerns originality. A machine which is
constructed and instructed to follow rules does not behave in
original ways, because its behavior has been speciﬁed in the rules.
But this is also true of men who behave simply by following rules,
since others have behaved in the same way before. It is only
behavior which is shaped by contingencies of reinforcement which
may be said to appear for the first time.
These distinctions lose their force when the behavior of a
machine is shaped by contingencies. Machines have been built
which come to respond to one stimulus rather than another when
the two have occurred together, as in Pavlovian conditioning.
Other machines have been built in which the rate of responding is
increased when a response is followed by a certain kind of
consequence, as in operant conditioning. The behavior of the
latter (1) is related to its consequences in a way traditionally
described with the term purpose, (2) has meaning in the sense that
we can infer from it something about the environmental
contingencies to which it has been exposed, and (3) is original in
the sense that the behavior it acquires under some contingencies
may not have been foreseen by its designer. It therefore comes
close to the contingency-shaped behavior of men. Is there any
surviving difference between man and machine?
One difference which will certainly be urged is that such a

machine “would not be aware of what it was doing.” It would not be
“conscious.” It would have no “feelings.” But, as in asking whether
a machine really “thinks,” the importance of these distinctions rests
upon an analysis of human behavior. What does it mean to say
that a man is aware of what he is doing, is conscious, and has
feelings?
A man learns to respond to himself and his own behavior as he
learns to respond to things in the world around him, although it is
hard for the verbal community to teach him to “know himself” in this
sense effectively. Machines respond to themselves, to features of
their own structure, and to their own behavior. A machine stops or
switches to an alternative mechanism when something goes wrong,
and “feedback” is often necessary in a delicate operation or when
a machine “thinks.” Theoretically there is no limit to the extent to
which a machine could respond to its own parts and activities. It
may still be argued that this is not “real feeling,” that no matter how
sensitive a machine may be it is still not “conscious.” But is this a
matter of the behavior with which one responds to oneself or of the
self to which one responds? In human behavior the critical issue is
not the feeling but what is felt, just as it is not the seeing but what
is seen. A machine, no matter how sensitive, can feel only a
machine. A machine is all a machine can possibly be conscious of.
This brings us to the one obvious and currently irreducible
difference between men and machines. They are built differently.
The ultimate difference is in componentry. To have human feelings
a machine would have to have human things to feel. To be
conscious or aware of itself as a man is conscious or aware of
himself a machine would have to be what a man is aware or
conscious of. It would have to be built like a man and would, of
course, be a man. It would behave like a man and its behavior
would include responding to itself in ways which we call being
conscious. Once complete, Adam would not only be alive, he
would be sentient, intelligent, and capable of becoming aware of
himself as Adam.
Man is a machine, but he is a very complex one. At present he is
far beyond the powers of men to construct—except, of course, in
the usual biological way. Only those who believe that something
nonphysical is essential to his functioning are likely to question this.
If a science of human behavior is impossible because man
possesses free will, or if behavior cannot be explained without
invoking a miracle-working mind, then indeed man cannot be

simulated. This is, of course, often argued. Irvine H. Page (109)
insists that “the brain is no more than a physical mechanism which,
without the mind, is not unlike the so-called ‘electronic brain’ of
industry. But without the guiding mind, the brain comes to little.” If
we believe with Vannevar Bush that “science is not enough” (30)
and that consciousness and free will have not been scientiﬁcally
analyzed, then we may doubt that man is a machine or that any
machine can simulate man. As our understanding of human
behavior increases, however, we appeal less and less to
explanatory ﬁctions, and we can then accept the fact that the
essential differences between machines and men concern
componentry. The problem of simulation is the technical problem of
working with the stuff of which the human body is made.
A machine which simulated human behavior in detail would
indeed tell us the “Inside Story.” We should have only to look at the
blueprints to see what entered into the creation of man. Like the
Inside Story of physiology, however, it would tell us nothing new
about behavior. Only when we know what a man actually does can
we be sure that we have simulated his behavior. The Outside Story
must be told first.

Man the creator
When machines are designed to extend the range of stimuli and
responses, the man who uses them occupies the place of the
Inner Man of stimulus-response or information theory. He
selectively attends to, detects, identiﬁes, discriminates among, and
stores and retrieves possibly ampliﬁed stimuli, and he makes
decisions and initiates possibly ampliﬁed action. When machines
take over these so-called cognitive functions, he is no longer
needed as part of the current system. But he has played the role
of designer, constructor, and programmer, and that is precisely the
role of the variables which take over the so-called cognitive
functions in an experimental analysis. Phylogenic contingencies
are responsible for the fact that men respond to stimuli, act upon
the environment, and change their behavior under contingencies
of reinforcement. When men make machines which have all these
characteristics, they play the role of an evolutionary history.
Ontogenic contingencies are responsible for the fact that a man
reacts to only some of the stimuli to which he is sensitive, makes
only some of the responses of which he is capable, and does so

with given probabilities upon given occasions. When men program
or instruct machines to behave in similar ways, they play the role of
an environmental history.
The time scales differ enormously, of course. The construction of
a machine may simulate a million years of evolution, and a brief
instruction may simulate a long exposure to contingencies of
reinforcement. (It has been argued that machines differ from men
because they show no period of “development,” but the so-called
development of a child’s behavior is a mixture of phylogeny and
ontogeny. A period of development is needed because of certain
biological exigencies in the production of a mature organism. A
“mature” machine can be constructed in its entirety before
instruction begins.) The evolutionary process may seem inefﬁcient,
but the human machine has additional properties—it can use
cruder sources of energy, it can reproduce itself, and so on. It also
shows a much greater variety. Phylogenic and ontogenic
contingencies have built men with more than monolithic purposes.
The machine a man builds and instructs continues to operate
when he is no longer in contact with it, but we “give him credit” for
what it does. He is responsible for its behavior. Similarly, the
phylogenic and ontogenic contingencies of which the behavior of a
man is a function pass into history while the man is still behaving,
but we must “give them credit” for what he does. They are
responsible for his achievements. We do not look for ultimate
responsibility in a machine, nor should we look for it in man. And
this applies as well to the behavior of building and instructing
machines. All human behavior, including the behavior of the
machines which man builds to behave in his place, is ultimately to
be accounted for in terms of the phylogenic contingencies of
survival which have produced man as a species and the ontogenic
contingencies of reinforcement which have produced him as an
individual.

L’Envoi
To a cynical onlooker, says Sir Cyril Burt (29), it appears that
“psychology, having ﬁrst bargained away its soul and then gone
out of its mind, seems now, as it faces an untimely end, to have
lost all consciousness.” Why is this amusing? It is a pun, of course,
and a bitter one. By slightly rephrasing three expressions having to
do with the rejection of explanatory ﬁctions, Sir Cyril characterizes a

behavioristic psychology as unconscious, insane, and damned.
None of these suggests impending death, however, and he has, in
fact, put the “untimely end” in the wrong ﬁeld. It is biology which
has lost its Life. And just as biology has never been livelier, so
psychology has never been more keenly aware of its problems or
of the steps to be taken in finding solutions.
Possibly we have misread Michelangelo and have reversed the
roles of creature and creator. Is it not man who has created God?
And will Adam not awake at last to an intelligent existence when
the soporiﬁc virtues of Life and Mind have crossed the gap in the
other direction?

References
1. Adams, D. K. Experimental studies of adaptive behavior in
cats. Comp. Psychol. Monogr., 1929, 6, No. 1, Serial No. 27.
2. Adrian, E. D. The basis of sensations; the action of the sense
organs. New York: W. W. Norton, 1928.
3. Allee, W. C. Cooperation among animals. New York: AbelardSchuman, 1938.
4. Anokhin, P. K. Advances in brain research, Nauka i chelovechestvo [Science and humanity], Znaniye, 1965, 35–47.
Reprinted in Soviet Psychology, 5, #1.
5. Ardrey, R. African genesis. New York: Atheneum, 1961.
6. Ashby, Sir Eric. Can education be machine made? New
Scientist, February 2, 1967.
7. Ayllon, T. and Haughton, E. Control of the behavior of
schizophrenic patients by food. J. Exp. Anal. Beh., 1962, 5,
343–352.
8. Azrin, N. H., Hutchinson, R. R., and McLaughlin, R. The
opportunity for aggression as an operant reinforcer during
aversive stimulation. J. Exp. Anal. Behav., 1965, 8, 171.
9. Bakan, David. Behaviorism and American urbanization. J.
History of Beh. Sciences, 1966, 2, 5–28.
10. Bannister, D. Psychology as an exercise in paradox. Bull. Brit.
Psychol. Soc., 1966, 19, No. 63.
11. Bauer, Raymond. The new man in Soviet psychology. Harvard
Univ. Press, 1952.
12. Beach, F. A. The snark was a boojum. Amer. Psychol., 1950,
5, 115–124.
13. Bellamy, Edward. Looking backward. Boston: Ticknor and
Company, 1888.
14. Bellugi, Ursula and Brown, Roger (Eds.). The acquisition of
language. (Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, Serial No. 92, 29, No. 1, 1964.)
15. Bernatowicz, A. J. Teleology in science teaching. Science,
1958, 128, 1402–1405.
16. Bixenstine, V. Edwin. Empiricism in latter-day behavioral

science. Science, 1964, 145, 464–467.
17. Blackman, Allan. Scientism and planning. Am. Behav.
Scientist, September, 1966.
18. Blanshard, Brand. Critical reflections on behaviorism. Proc. of
the Am. Phil. Soc., 1965.
19. Blanshard, Brand and Skinner, B. F. The problem of
consciousness—a debate. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, 1967, 27, 317–337.
20. Bloch, H. D. Learning in some simple nonbiological systems.
Amer. Scientist, 1965, 53, 59–79.
21. Bloomfield, L. Language. New York: Holt, 1933.
22. Blough, D. S. Dark adaptation in the pigeon. J. of Comp. and
Physiol. Psych., 1956, 49, 425–430.
23. Blough, D. S., and Schirer, A. M. Scotopic spectral sensitivity
in the monkey. Science, 1963, 139, 493–494.
24. Borrow, George. The Romany rye. London: John Murray,
1857.
25. Boswell, James. Life of Samuel Johnson. Constable Ed.,
1783, Aet. 74, Vol. VI.
26. Breland, K. and Breland, M. The misbehavior of organisms.
Amer. Psychol., 1961, 16, 681.
27. Bridgman, P. W. The nature of some of our physical concepts.
New York: Philosophical Library, 1952.
28. Bridgman, P. W. The way things are. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1959.
29. Burt, C. The concept of consciousness. Brit. J. Psychol., 1962,
53, 229–242.
30. Bush, Vannevar. Science is not enough. New York: Morrow &
Co., Inc., 1967.
31. Butler, Samuel. Notebooks. New York: Dutton, 1917.
32. Butterfield, H. The origins of modern science. Collier Books
edition, 1962.
33. Cabanis, P. J. G. Rapports du physique et du moral de
l’homme. Paris: Crapart, Caille et Ravier, 1802.
34. Cabet, Etienne. Voyage en Icarie. Paris: Bureau du Populaire,
1848.
35. Charlesworth, J. C. (ed.) The limits of behavioralism in political

science. Philadelphia: American Academy of Political and
Social Sciences, 1962.
36. Chomsky, N. Review of Skinner’s Verbal behavior. In
Language, 1959, 35, 26–58.
37. Clark, J. H. Adaptive machines in psychiatry. In Wiener, J. and
Schadé, J. P. (Eds.). Nerve, brain and memory models.
Amsterdam, 1963.
38. Cohen, Harold, Filipczah, James, and Bis, John S. CASE I: An
initial study of contingencies applicable to special education.
Educational Facility Press—IBR, 1967.
39. De Laguna, G. Speech: its function and development. New
Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 1927.
40. Diderot, D. Supplement au voyage de Bougainville. (Written in
1774, published in 1796.)
41. Dubos, R. Humanistic biology. Amer. Scientist, 1965, 53, 4–
19.
42. Ekstein, Rudolph and Caruth, Elaine. From Eden to utopia.
American Imago, 1965, 22, 128-141.
43. Erlenmeyer-Kimling, E., Hirsch, J., and Weiss, J. M. Studies in
experimental behavior genetics: III. Selection and hybridization
analyses of individual differences in the sign of geotaxis. J.
Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 1962, 55, 722–731.
44. Evans, B. and Evans, C. A dictionary of contemporary
American usage. New York: Random House, 1957.
45. Ferster, C. B. Arithmetic behavior in chimpanzees. Scientific
American, May, 1964.
46. Ferster, C. B. and Skinner, B. F. Schedules of reinforcement.
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1957.
47. Feuer, L. S. The scientific intellectual. New York: Basic Books,
1963.
48. Frankenberger, Z. and Kortlandt, A. On the essential morphological basis for human culture. Current Anthropol., 1965, 6,
320.
49. Freud, Sigmund. The origins of psychoanalysis. Letters to
Wilhelm Fliess, Drafts and notes: 1887–1902. New York: Basic
Books, Inc., 1954.
50. Friedmann, H. quoted in article entitled “African honey-guides”.
Science, 1956, 123, 55.

51. Galton, F. Inquiries into human faculty and its development.
London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1883.
52. Gardner, H. Art through the ages. New York: Harcourt, Brace,
1926.
53. Gibbon, Edward. The decline and fall of the Roman empire.
Modern Library ed. Vol. 1, p. 238, I. footnote 154 to Chapter
10.
54. Godwin, W. Motto on title page of Caleb Williams. Quoted by
Arnold Kettle, An introduction to the English novel. London:
Hutchinson, 1951.
55. Goncourt, Edmond et Jules de. Journal: Memoires de la vie
lettéraire. L’imprimerie nationale de Monaco, 1956.
56. Goodman, Paul. Compulsory mis-education. New York:
Horizon Press, 1964.
57. Gray, P. H. The descriptive study of imprinting in birds from
1863 to 1953. J. Gen. Psychol., 1963, 68, 333–346.
58. Grindley, G. C. The formulation of a simple habit in guinea
pigs. Brit. J. Psychol., 1932, 23, 127–147.
59. Harkness, K. and Battell, J. S. Chess Review, February and
March, 1947.
60. Harris, Frank. Oscar Wilde, his life and confessions. New York:
the author, 1916.
61. Hearst, Eliot. Psychology across the chessboard. Psychology
Today, June, 1967.
62. Hefferline, R. F., Keenan, B., and Harford, R. A. Escape and
avoidance conditioning in human subjects without their
observation of the response. Science, 1959, 130, 1338–1339.
63. Henry, Jules. Review of human behavior; an inventory of
scientific findings by Bernard Berelson and Gary A. Steiner. In
Scientific American, July, 1964, Vol. 211.
64. Henry, Jules. Letter to the editor of Scientific American.
September, 1964.
65. Herrnstein, R. J. Relative and absolute strength of response
as a function of frequency of reinforcement. J. Exp. Anal.
Behav., 1961, 4, 267–272.
66. Herrnstein, R. J. and Sommers, P. van. Method for sensory
scaling with animals. Science, 1962, 135, 40–41.
67. Hirsch, J. Behavior genetics and individuality understood.

Science, 1963, 142, 1436–1442.
68. Hoffman, H. S., Schiff, D., Adams, J., and Serle, J. L.
Enhanced distress vocalization through selective
reinforcement. Science, 1966, 151, 352–354.
69. Hogben, L. Statistical theory. London: George Allen and
Unwin, Ltd., 1957.
70. Holt, E. B. Animal drive and the learning process. New York:
Holt, 1931.
71. Hull, Clark L. Principles of behavior. New York: D. AppletonCentury, 1943.
72. Huxley, Aldous. Brave new world. Garden City, New York:
Doubleday, Doran & Co., Inc., 1932.
73. Huxley, J. Psychometabolism. Perspectives in biology and
medicine, 1964, 7, #4.
74. Hyman, Ray and Cohen, Elizabeth G. Water-witching in the
United States. Am. Sociological Review, 1957, 22, 719–724.
75. Ivanov-Smolensky, A. G. On methods of examining
conditioned food reflexes in children and in mental disorders.
Brain, 1927, 50, 138–141.
76. Jones, Ernest. The life and work of Sigmund Freud. New York:
Basic Books, 1953.
77. Kateb, George. Utopia and its enemies. New York: Free Press
of Glencoe, 1963.
78. Kavanau, J. L. Behavior: Confinement, adaptation, and
compulsory regimes in laboratory studies. Science, 1964, 143,
490.
79. Keehn, J. D. Consciousness and behaviorism. Brit. J.
Psychol., 1964, 55, 89–91.
80. Kelleher, R. T. Variables and behavior. Amer. Psychologist,
1962, 17, 659–660.
81. Kierkegaard, Soren. Diary of a seducer. New York: Ungar,
1966.
82. Knight, Eric. Lassie come home. New York: Winston, 1940.
83. Koch, Sigmund. Psychology and emerging conceptions of
knowledge as unitary. In T. W. Wann (Ed.). Behaviorism and
Phenomenology. Univ. of Chicago Press, 1964.
84. Köhler, W. The mentality of apes. Translated from the 2nd rev.
ed. by Ella Winter. 2nd ed., revised and reset. New York:

Harcourt, Brace & Co., Inc., 1927.
85. Kortlandt, A. (and Frankenberger, Z.) Current Anthropology,
1965, 6, 320.
86. Kortlandt, A. Reported in Time magazine, April 21, 1967.
87. Krutch, J. W. The measure of man. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill,
1953.
88. Laclos, Choderlos de. Les liaisons dangereuses. Paris, 1782.
89. Lévi-Strauss, C. Structural anthropology. New York: Basic
Books, 1967.
90. Lewis, C. S. The abolition of man. New York: Macmillan, 1957.
91. Life Magazine, June 28, 1948, page 38.
92. Lindsley, O. R. Direct measurement and prosthesis of retarded
behavior. Journal of Education, 1964, 147, 62–81.
93. Lorenz, K. Evolution and modification of behavior. Chicago:
Univ. of Chicago Press, 1965.
94. Lorenz, K. On aggression. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World,
1966, German ed. 1963.
95. Mach, Ernst. The science of mechanics. (Translated by T. J.
McCormack.) Chicago: The Open Court Publishing Co., 1893.
96. MacKay, D. M. On comparing the brain with machines.
American Scientist, 1954, 42, 261–268.
97. Maingot, Eliane. Les automates. Paris: Hochette, 1959.
98. Maslow, Abraham. Toward a psychology of being. Princeton,
New Jersey: Van Nostram, 1962.
99. Mayow, John. De respiratione. (1668) Medico-physical Works
of John Mayow, Alembic Club Reprints, No. 17, Edinburgh,
1907, p. 207. Quoted by T. S. Patterson, Isis, 1931, 15, 530.
100. Mayr, Ernst. Agassiz, Darwin, and evolution. Harvard Library
Bulletin, 1959, 13, #2.
101. Miller, S. and Konorski, J. Sur une forme particulière des
réflexes conditionnels. Comples rendus des séances de la
société polonaise de biologie, 1928, 49, 1155–1157. (Eng.
trans.: J. Exper. Anal. Behavior, 1969, 12, 187–189.)
102. Morris, William. News from nowhere. Boston: Roberts Brothers,
1890.
103. Morse, W. H. and Skinner, B. F. J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol.,
1957, 50, 279.

104. Negley, G. and Patrick, J. M. The quest for utopia. New York:
Schuman, 1952.
105. Neisser, Ulric. The imitation of man by machine. Science,
1963, 139, 193–197.
106. Newell, Allen, Shaw, J. C. and Simon, H. A. Chess-playing
programs and the problem of complexity. IBM Journal, October,
1958.
107. Newman, J. H., Cardinal. The idea of a university. Originally
published in 1852. London: Longmans, 1923.
108. Orwell, George. Nineteen eighty four. London: Secker &
Warburg, 1949.
109. Page, Irvine. Chemistry of the brain. Science, 1957, 125,
721–727.
110. Peterson, N. Control of behavior by presentation of an
imprinted stimulus. Science, 1960, 132, 1395–1396.
111. Polanyi, Michael. The study of man. London: Routledge,
1959. (Lindsay Memorial Lectures, 1958.)
112. Polanyi, Michael. Personal knowledge. University of Chicago
Press, 1960.
113. Polanyi, Michael. Science and man in the universe. In Harry
Woolf (Ed.). Science as a cultural force. Baltimore; Johns
Hopkins Press, 1964. Quoted by G. C. Amstutz, Main Currents
in Modern Thought, 1968, 24, #4.
114. Popper, K. R. The open society and its enemies. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1957.
115. Pryor, Karen. Personal communication.
116. Rock, Irvin and Harris, Charles S. Vision and touch. Scientific
American, 1967, 216, #5, 96–104.
117. Rogers, Carl. On becoming a person: a therapist’s view of
psychotherapy. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 1961.
118. Rousseau, J. J. Émile ou de l’éducation. Le Haye: Néaulme,
1762.
119. Salaman, R. A. Tradesmen’s tools. In A History of
Technology, Vol. III, London: Oxford Univ. Press, 1957.
120. Schaffer, H. R. Proximity seeking and proximity avoidance: the
basic dimensions of social behavior in infancy. Bul. Brit.
Psychol. Soc., 1966, 19, #65, p. 70.
121. Sebeok, T. A. Animal communication. Science, 1965, 147,

1006–1014.
122. Sidman, M. Avoidance conditioning with brief shock and no
exteroceptive warning signal. Science, 1953, 118, 157–158.
123. Sidman, M. Tactics of scientific research. New York: Basic
Books, 1960.
124. Skinner, B. F. The concept of the reflex in the description of
behavior. J. Gen. Psych. 1931, 5, 427–458.*
125. Skinner, B. F. Two types of conditioned reflex and a pseudotype. J. Gen. Psych., 1935, 12, 66–77.*
126. Skinner, B. F. The generic nature of the concepts of stimulus
and response. J. of Gen. Psych. 1935, 12, 40–65.*
127. Skinner, B. F. The verbal summator and a method for the
study of latent speech. Jour. of Psych., 1936, 2, 71–107.
128. Skinner, B. F. Two types of conditioned reflex: A reply to
Konorski and Miller. J. Gen. Psychol., 1937, 16, 272–279.*
129. Skinner, B. F. The behavior of organisms. New York:
Appleton-Century, 1938.
130. Skinner, B. F. The operational analysis of psychological terms.
Psych. Rev., 1945.*
131. Skinner, B. F. Current trends in experimental psychology.
Current Trends in Psychology. Pittsburgh Univ. Press, 1947.*
132. Skinner, B. F. “Superstition” in the pigeon. J. Exp. Psychol.,
1948, 38, 168.
133. Skinner, B. F. Walden Two. New York: The Macmillan
Company, 1948.
134. Skinner, B. F. Are theories of learning necessary? Psychol.
Rev., 1950, 57, 193–216.*
135. Skinner, B. F. Science and human behavior. New York: The
Macmillan Company, 1953.
136. Skinner, B. F. A critique of psychoanalytic concepts and
theories. Sci. Monthly, 1954, 79, 300–305.*
137. Skinner, B. F. The control of human behavior. Transactions of
the New York Academy of Sciences, 1965, Series II, Vol. 17,
No. 7.*
138. Skinner, B. F. What is psychotic behavior? Theory and
treatment of the psychoses. (Dedication of Renard Hospital, St.
Louis), 1955.*

139. Skinner, B. F. Freedom and the control of men. Amer.
Scholar, 1956, 25, 47–65.*
140. Skinner, B. F. Some issues concerning the control of human
behavior. Science, 1956, 124, 1056–1066.*
141. Skinner, B. F. Verbal behavior. New York: Appleton-CenturyCrofts, 1957.
142. Skinner, B. F. The flight from the laboratory. Current trends in
psychological theory. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press,
1961.
143. Skinner, B. F. Pigeons in a pelican. Amer. Psychol., 1960, 15,
28–37.*
144. Skinner, B. F. Cumulative record: Revised Edition. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1961.
145. Skinner, B. F. The design of cultures. Daedalus, 1961, 534–
546.*
146. Skinner, B. F. Two “synthetic social relations.” J. Exp. Anal.
Beh. 1962, 5, 531–533.*
147. Skinner, B. F. Behaviorism at fifty. Science, 1963, 134, 566–
602.
148. Skinner, B. F. Operant behavior. Amer. Psych., 1963, 18,
503–515.
149. Skinner, B. F. “Man.” Proc. Amer. Philosophical Society,
December, 1964, 108, #6, 482–485.
150. Skinner, B. F. An operant analysis of problem-solving.
Chapter in Problem Solving: Research, Method, Teaching. Ed.,
Benjamin Kleinmuntz. New York: John Wiley, 1966.
151. Skinner, B. F. Preface to paperback edition of The behavior
of organisms. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1966.
152. Skinner, B. F. The technology of teaching. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1968.
153. Skinner, B. F. Freedom and dignity. (In preparation.)
154. Stevens, S. S. The operational basis of psychology. Amer. J.
of Psych., 1935, 47, 323–330.
155. Taube, Mortimer. Computers and common sense: the myth of
thinking machines. New York: Columbia UP, 1961.
156. Taylor, Charles. The explanation of behavior. New York:
Humanities Press, 1964.

157. Terrace, H. S. Discrimination learning with and without “errors.”
J. Exp. Anal. Behav., 1963, 6, 1–27.
158. Thorpe, W. H. The learning abilities of birds. Part I. Ibis, 1951,
93, 1–52.
159. Tinbergen, N. The herring-gull’s world. London: Collins, 1953.
160. Tolman, E. C. and Brunswik, E. The organism and the causal
texture of the environment. Psychol. Rev., 1935, 42, 43–77.
161. Vives, Juan Luis. (1492–1540). De anima et vita. See F.
Watson, Vives on education. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ.
Press, 1913.
162. Waddington, C. H. The evolution of adaptations. Endeavor,
July, 1953, 134–139.
163. Warren, H. C. (Ed.). Dictionary of psychology. Boston:
Houghton-Mifflin, 1934.
164. Watson, J. B. Behaviorism. New York: W. W. Norton, 1924.
165. Westby, G. Psychology today: problems and directions. Bull.
Brit. Psychol. Soc., 1966, 19, No. 65.
166. White, R. A. Misperception and the Vietnam War. Journal of
Social Issues, 1966, 22, #3.
167. Wiggins, David. Quoted in advertisement for Time in Sat.
Rev., February 5, 1966.
168. Wilson, E. Bright. An introduction to scientific research. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1952.
169. Wynne-Edwards, V. C. Self-regulating systems in populations
of animals. Science, 1965, 147, 1543–1548.

Acknowledgments
Chapter 1 was given as an Annual Lecture at the National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, on February 22nd, 1968.
A briefer version was read in Paris on March 15th at a Symposium
arranged by the International Brain Research Organization. An
adapted version was published as “Psychology in the Year 2000”
by Wayne State University.
Chapter 2 is based on two talks given on the BBC in the winter
of 1966–1967 and published in The Listener under the titles
“Visions of Utopia” (January 5, 1967) and “Utopia through the
Control of Human Behavior” (January 12, 1967). The ﬁrst of these
appears here in a slightly modiﬁed version and the second has
been extensively revised and enlarged. In essentially its present
form the chapter appears as “Utopia and Human Behavior” in Moral
Problems in Contemporary Society, edited by Paul Kurtz
(Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1969) and is reprinted
here by permission.
Chapter 3 was given as a lecture at the Walter Reed Army
Medical Center under the auspices of the Washington School of
Psychiatry on March 26, 1965, and published as “Contingencies of
Reinforcement in the Design of a Culture” in Behavioral Science,
1 9 6 6 , 11, 159–166. Permission to reprint is gratefully
acknowledged.
Chapter 4 was part of a symposium on applications of operant
conditioning at a meeting of the American Psychological
Association, September 6, 1964. It was published as “What is the
Experimental Analysis of Behavior?” in the Journal of the
Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 1966, 9, 213–218, copyright ©
1966 by the Society for the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, and
is reprinted by permission.
Chapter 5 is a chapter in Operant Behavior: Areas of Research
and Application , edited by Werner K. Honig, New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts, 1966. It appeared ﬁrst as “Operant Behavior” in
American Psychologist, 1963, 18, 503–515, and is reprinted here
by permission.
Chapter 6 was part of a symposium at the Carnegie Institute of
Technology, April, 1965. It was published in Problem Solving:
Research, Method, and Theory, edited by Benjamin Kleinmuntz

(New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1966), and is reprinted by
permission.
Chapter 7 was presented at a symposium at the University of
Kentucky in November, 1965, and published in Science, 1966,
153, 1205–1213, copyright 1966 by the American Association for
the Advancement of Science. Permission to reprint has been
granted.
An early version of Chapter 8 was given as the R. M. Elliott
Lecture at the University of Minnesota, December, 1962. The
present version was part of a symposium at Rice University. It
appears in Behaviorism and Phenomenology, edited by T. W.
Wann, University of Chicago Press, 1964. It appeared ﬁrst in
Science, 1963, 140, 951–958, copyright 1963 by the American
Association for the Advancement of Science, and is reprinted here
by permission. Some of the material in the notes following Chapter
8 is taken from a debate with Brand Blanshard entitled “The
Problem of Consciousness” and printed in Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, March, 1967, 27, No. 3. It is
reprinted with permission.
Chapter 9 is based upon a Herrick Lecture given at Denison
University in October, 1968; it was prepublished in Psychology
Today
Magazine,
April,
1969.
Copyright
©
Communications/Research/Machines/Inc., and used by permission.
Preparation of the book has been supported by a Career Award
from the National Institutes of Mental Health (Grant K6-MH-21, 77501). I am grateful to Mrs. Alexandra Huebner for her help in the
preparation of the manuscript.

Notes
Preface
1 “The Concept of the Reﬂex in the Description of Behavior” (124), “The Generic Nature of
the Concepts of Stimulus and Response” (126), “Two Types of Conditioned Reﬂex and a
Pseudo-Type” (125), “Two Types of Conditioned Reﬂex: A Reply to Konorski and Miller”
(128), “The Operational Analysis of Psychological Terms” (130), and “Current Trends in
Experimental Psychology” (131).
2 “A Critique of Psychoanalytic Concepts and Theories” (136), “What is Psychotic
Behavior?” (138), and “The Flight from the Laboratory” (142).
3 “Freedom and the Control of Men” (139), “The Control of Human Behavior” (137), “Some
Issues Concerning the Control of Human Behavior” (140), and “The Design of Cultures”
(145).
4 Nor should we promote hypothetico-deductive procedures in artiﬁcial ways. “Through the
generosity of an anonymous donor” the American Association for the Advancement of
Science offers an annual prize of one thousand dollars “intended to encourage studies and
analyses of social behavior based on explicity stated assumptions or postulates leading to
conclusions or deductions that are veriﬁable by systematic empirical research; to encourage
in social inquiry the development and application of the kind of dependable methodology that
has proved so fruitful in the natural sciences.”

1 The role of the environment
1 A more active form of attention is analyzed as a sequence of contingencies; paying
attention is precurrent behavior having the effect of changing stimuli. A pigeon will change the
shape or color of a visual pattern if the contingencies under which it is reinforced are thereby
improved.
1 His paper is an interesting demonstration of the power of Pavlov’s inﬂuence in Russia.
Anokhin writes:
“It seems strange that for so many years the results of action were never the subject of
special physiological analysis, since they are the vital connecting link between the different
stages of the behavioral act. This is even stranger if we think of the true nature of behavior.
As a matter of fact, men and animals are always interested in the results of action. It is only
because of them that often long chains of behavioral acts are embarked upon, for only failure
to obtain the desired results acts as the stimulus for further acts until what is attained
corresponds in some way to what is desired.
“In the classical ‘reﬂex arc’ there is no room for the evaluation of results. This is the most

outstanding failing of the reﬂex theory, which showed the dualism of its creator and for a long
time distracted physiologists from a materialist solution to the problem of purposiveness in
human and animal behavior. In fact the very adaptation of the ‘reﬂex arc’ as the central model
for explaining behavior for many years excluded all possibility of treating results as a
motivating factor in the formation of variability of behavior. There was simply no place for
results in the reﬂex model and so their physiological character or, more precisely, their
decisive role in forming the functional systems of the organism remained outside
physiologists’ field of vision.”
The passage is remarkable only for the fact that it was published in 1965.

2 Utopia as an experimental culture
1The title of the French translation—Le meilleur des mondes—makes the same point.
Pangloss assures Candide that it is this world, in spite of its diseases, earthquakes, and
famines, which is the best of all possible worlds. Nor were Huxley’s economics part of any
world of the future; they were early Keynesian or Rooseveltian. His psychedelic drug
“soma,” though it anticipated LSD, was used like mescalin or alcohol.
2A more detailed analysis of the concept of freedom and dignity from this point of view is in
preparation (153).

5 Operant behavior
1 The point of this section is developed further in Chapter 6.

6 An operant analysis of problem solving
1 For a more detailed analysis of problem solving, see (135, pp. 246-252) and (152,
Chapter 6).
2 More precisely, in a maze with no loops (i.e., where all wrong entrances are to culs-desac) the right path is marked after one successful passage through the maze by any odd
number of sets of prints.
1The fact that it is much easier to learn to follow a marked than an unmarked route might
suggest that the external path is being used in lieu of the internal pathways which ﬁgure so
prominently in neurophysiology, but the two kinds of paths have very different functions.

7 The phylogeny and ontogeny of behavior
1 I am indebted to Professor Leslie Reid for bringing Waddington’s suggestion, and its
behavioral implications, to my attention.
1 Dr. C. W. McCutchen has called my attention to the fact that Dr. Ronald Fraser in The
Habitable Earth, published in 1964, points out that the green turtle that now migrates between
Brazil and Ascension Island, an annual journey of 1,400 miles each way, may originally have

gone at most 100 miles. Dr. Fraser does not discuss the importance of this fact for
phylogenic programming.

8 Behaviorism at fifty
1 The doctrine of parallelism may have prepared the ground with its acknowledgment that
the physical aspects of a man’s behavior might be accounted for without referring to mental
aspects.
2 For an analysis of the ways in which the verbal community may partly solve its problem,
s ee (130). Although the private world is deﬁned anatomically as “within the skin,” the
boundaries are the limits beyond which the reinforcing community cannot maintain effective
contingencies.

9 The inside story
1 Or when the rest of him seems wholly inactive. The Goncourt brothers note the behavior
of their mistress who has fallen into a drugged sleep but nevertheless starts to talk about her
early life. “It is an odd voice arousing a strange emotion, almost fear,—the involuntary voice
escaping, word without will … a frightening thing, like a cadaver possessed by a dream” (55,
entry for 3 September, 1859).
2 The justiﬁcation requires that the shortcoming be absolute: no learning theory must ever
be able to account for the acquisition of speech.

References
* Reprinted in (144).

Index
Abilities, 77, 183
Acceptance of life, 215
Accidental killing, 215
Actors, 263
Adams, D. K., 107, 299
Adams, J., 303
Adaptation, 5, 9, 177, 194, 198
Adaptive machines, 83
Addiction, 60
Adjusting schedule, 120
Adjustment, 5
Adrian, E. D., 148, 299
Adventitious contingencies, 177
Advertisement, 293
Advice, 148
Affection, 16, 212
Afferent neural interaction, 28
African honey guide, 184
Agassiz, Louis, 132
Age, 87
Aggression, 51f., 65f., 129, 195f.
Agriculture, 59
Alchemists, 110
Alcohol, 58
Algebraic summation, 179
Allee, W. C., 299
Ambiguity, 87
American Association for the Advancement of Science, x
American Cancer Society, 57
Ames, Adelbert, 248
Amount remembered, 76, 92f.
Analysis of behavior, 75

Anarchy, 32
Animism, 221
Anokhin, P. K., 26, 299
Anthropology, 12, 20, 96
Anticipation, 127
Antinomianism, 170
Anxiety, 127, 169
Apprentice, 139
Arcadia, 33, 64
Aristotle, 256
Ardrey, R., 299
Art, 62, 68f., 102, 154
Ashby, Sir Eric, 99, 299
Attitudes, 77
Augustine, Saint, 31
Automata, 284f.
Automatic goodness, 44
Autonomic reflexes, 201
Avoidance, 23
Awareness, 159, 229, 244
Ayllon, T., 17, 299
Azrin, N., 195, 299
Bacon, Francis, 32f., 82
Bakan, David, 262, 299
Bannister, D., 102, 299
Battell, J. S., 302
Bauer, Raymond, 35, 299
Beach, F. A., 189, 299
Bees, 179
Behavioral oscillation, 28
Behavioralism, 13
Behaviorism, Ch. 8
Békésy, G. V., 235
Belief, 125f., 170

Bell Telephone Laboratories, 222
Bellamy, Edward, 300
Bellugi, Ursula, 90, 300
Benedict, Saint, 20
Berkeley, 248
Bernatowicz, A. J., 109, 300
Betting, 164
Bingo, 19
Bis, John S., 301
Bixenstine, V. Edwin, 85, 300
Blackman, Allan, 300
Blacksmith, 139
Blanshard, Brand, 243, 257, 300
Bloch, H. D., 137, 300
Bloomfield, L., 21
Blough, D. S., 235, 300
Borrow, George, 253, 300
Boswell, James, 300
Breland, K. and M., 191f., 300
Bribery, 99
Bridgman, P. W., 155f., 166f., 227, 248, 300
Brown, Roger, 90, 300
Brunswik, Egon, 7, 308
Burt, Sir Cyril, 268, 297, 300
Bush, Vannevar, 299, 300
Butler, Samuel, 300
Butterfield, H., 256, 301
Cabanis, P. J. G., 280, 301
Cabet, Etienne, 33, 301
Caffeine, 58
Capitalism, 19
Caruth, Elaine, 301
Casanova, 271
Cervantes, 281

Chained operants, 23
Change-over delay, 120
Charlesworth, J. C., 301
Charmides, 152
Chess, 122
Chimpanzee, 202
Choice, 94, 120, 154
Chomsky, N., 301
Christian heaven, 31, 62
Cigarette habit, 56f.
Circular reflex, 26
Circumvention of an operant analysis, 113
Clark, J. H., 301
Cockaigne, 37
Cognitive maps, 147
Cognitive theory, 28, 183, 236f., 266, 273
Cohen, Elizabeth G., 303
Cohen, Harold, 301
Comfort, 65
Command, 148
Communication, 197f.
Communism, 19
Composers, 102, 154
Computer, 78, 80, 149, 286
Computer simulation, 104, 288
Concepts, 162ff.
Concurrent contingencies, 95
Conditioned reflex, 3, 78
Conflict, 117, 120
Consciousness, 156f., 170, 231
Conspiracy, 153
Continental drift, 217
Contingencies of reinforcement, 7, 9, 22, 25, 79, 133, 175
Contingencies of selection, 175
Contingency-shaped behavior, 160ff., 289

Copy theory, 247, 274
Crafts, 68ff.
Creation of Adam, 269
Critics, 98
Crusoe, Robinson, 33
Cuckoo clock, 269, 284
Cue, 4
Culture, 40
Cumulative record, 81, 94
Curiosity, 69
Customs, 12
Cybernetics, 104, 194
Cycles, 88
Daily life, 20
D’Alembert, 34
Damage, 210
Darwin, Charles, 106, 132, 178, 188, 204, 223
Da Vinci, Leonardo, 269
Daydreams, 233
Death instinct, 173, 215
Death of behaviorism, 267
Decision-making, 80, 117, 120, 154, 165, 240
Dedication, 93
Deduction, 144
Deed, 170
Deep structure, 279
De Laclos, Choderlos, 59, 304
De Laguna, G., 197, 301
Delayed matching, 23
Deliberation, 169
Delinquent behavior, 88
Demoniac possession, 16
Demonstrations, 248
Dependent variable, 88

Deprivation, 202
Depth psychology, 279
De Sade, 200
Descartes, 3, 148, 243, 285
Design, 42f.
Design of experiments, 110
Destiny, 45
Detecting stimuli, 78
Determinism, 128
Development, 87, 296
Developmental psychology, 89
Dewey, John, 170
Diderot, Denis, 32f., 188, 301
Differential reinforcement of rate of responding, 25
Dignity, 101
Disaffection, 70
Discriminate, 76, 92, 163, 251
Domesticated animals, 191
Dostoievski, Fyodor, 277
Dreams, 233
Drive, 4, 54, 63, 182f.
Drugs, 53, 67f., 69f., 79
Dualism, 249
Dubos, R., 301
Ebbinghaus, 77
Echoic behavior, 25
Economic contingencies, 18f., 63, 96
Economic Man, 97
Education, 14, 62f., 96
Educational contingencies, 22
Eels, 217
Ego, 272
Ekstein, Rudolph, 301
Electric organ of the eel, 177

Eliot, George, 277
Emotion, 4, 79, 169, 182, 201
Empiricism, 170
Environment, 3, 54
Environment, role of, Ch. 1
Environmental solution, Ch. 3, 66, 216
Erasmus, 32, 62
Erlenmeyer-Kimling, E., 301
Errors, 76, 93
Escalation, 215
Escape, 23
Ethical practices, 123, 158, 168
Ethnology, 12
Ethology, 4, 87, 172, 182f., 199
Evans, B. and C., 247, 301
Evil, 271
Evolution, 203
Exogamy, 188
Expectancy, 105, 115, 123f., 147, 236
Experience, 78
Experimental analysis of behavior, 54, Ch. 4
Experimental space, 22, 94
Extrapolation, 100, 197
Extrasensory perception, 250
Eye movements, 234
Factor analysis, 110
Faculties, 77
Faith, 170
Familiarity, 87
Faraday, 85, 111
Fechner, Gustav, 104, 248
Feedback, 26
Feelings, 130, 166, 189, 255, 293
Ferster, C. B., 301

Feuer, L. S., 62, 301
Filipczah, Ames, 301
Fisher, R. A., 81, 111f.
Fixed-interval schedule, 24
Fixed-ratio schedule, 19, 24
Fliess, W., 83
Folk wisdom, 139
Forebodings, 127
Form, 200
Formalistic Fallacy, 89f., 265, 292
Forming concepts, 76
Frankenberger, Z., 182, 301
Free will, 128
Freud, xi, 4, 35, 83, 93, 125, 129f., 152, 165, 170, 225, 234, 246,
254, 272, 280, 302
Friedmann, H., 184, 302
Frustration, 20
Gallienus, 33
Galton, F., 224, 302
Gambling, 19, 60, 69f., 117, 119, 164
Games, 70, 80, 117, 120
Gardner, H., 302
Gateways to the Mind, 222
General systems theory, 104
Generalization gradient, 79
Geography of the mind, 265
Geophysics, 100
Gestalt psychology, 86, 266
Gesture, 180
Gibbons, Edward, 33, 302
Gibbs, Willard, 93
Gilbert, 85, 112
Giovanni, Don, 66
Gluttony, 52, 66

Godwin, W., 302
Golden Rule, 140, 261
Goncourt, E. and J., 272, 292, 302
Goodman, Paul, 98, 302
Government, 20, 63, 140, 158f.
Grammar, 11, 124, 141, 278
Gray, P. H., 172, 187, 302
Greene, Graham, 269
Grindley, G. C., 108, 302
Guilt, 129
Guthrie, Edwin R., 6, 26
Habit, 3, 181, 183
Hampton Court Maze, 137, 161
Harford, R. A., 302
Harkness, K., 302
Harlow, Harry, 199
Harris, Charles S., 305
Harris, Frank, 60, 302
Haughton, Eric, 17, 299
Hearst, Eliot, 288, 302
Hedonism, 5, 9, 169
Hedonist ethic, 63
Hefferline, R. F., 302
Henry, Jules, 98, 101, 275, 302
Heroin, 58
Herrnstein, R. J., 235, 303
Higher mental processes, 95
Hirsch, J., 301, 303
Historical variables, 277
History, 71, 96
Hitler, 257
Hoffman, H. S., 303
Hogben, L., 112, 226, 303
Holt, E. B., 3, 128, 303

Homosexual reinforcement, 62
Homunculus, 222
Hooke, 112
Hull, Clark, xi, 3, 28, 303
Hunger, 79, 87, 281
Hutchinson, R. R., 299
Huxley, Aldous, 30, 35f., 303
Huxley, Julian, 175, 182, 303
Hyman, Ray, 303
Hypotheses, 81, 93, 110, 121, 153
Hypothetico-deductive model, 83
Hypothetico-deductive systems, 104
Id, 272
Ideas, 183, 275
Identification, 238
Imitation, 113, 194f., 198ff.
Incentive wage, 19
Incest, 188
Induction, 144
Inference, 239
Information theory, 5, 104, 198
Inherited behavior, Ch. 7
Inhibition, 92, 213
Input, 5, 198
Instinct, 171, 181, 199f., 204
Instinctive signal systems, 197
Instructions, 114, 124, 139, 163
Intellect, 169
Intelligence, 205
Intention, 105, 115, 123f., 128, 147, 193
Intentional movements, 180
Interlocking schedule, 120
Intermittent reinforcement, 164
Interoception, 226

Interpretation, 82, 100
Intervening variables, 28
Intraspecies aggression, 214
Intraverbal behavior, 25
Introspection, 95, 126, 225, 241, 265
Intuition, 152, 169f.
Irrational behavior, 151
Ivanov-Smolensky, A. G., 107, 303
James, William, 170, 257, 261, 265, 292
Johnson, Samuel, 70
Jones, Ernest, 303
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 99
Joy, 169
Judeo-Christian tradition, 20, 272
Juvenile delinquents, 20
Kateb, George, 30, 303
Kavanau, J. L., 303
Keehn, J. D., 268, 303
Keenan, B., 302
Kelleher, R. T., 192, 303
Kierkegaard, Soren, 59, 303
Killing, 212
Knight, Eric, 277, 303
Knowledge, 76, 125, 155, 160, 170
Koch, Sigmund, 267, 303
Köhler, W., 107, 251, 304
Konorski, J., 27, 28, 108, 304
Kortlandt, A., 182, 202, 301, 304
Krutch, J. W., 30, 44, 99, 304
La Mettrie, 223, 280
Language, 12, 141, 179
La Rochefoucauld, 53, 277
Latency, 76

Law of Effect, 105
Laws, 96, 140, 147
Learned behavior, 199
Learning, 95
Learning curve, 6, 111
Legal, 168
Leisure, 67f.
Lewin, Kurt, 161
Lewis, C. S., 304
Licurgus, 184
Life, 284
Life magazine, 29
Lindsley, O. R., 16, 304
Linguistics, 11, 89f., 96, 265
Literary criticism, 96
Literature, 62, 69, 71
Loeb, Jacques, 3
Logicians, 90
Lorenz, K., 173, 175, 177, 196, 304
LSD, 259
Lust, 52
Lysistrata, 62
Mach, Ernst, 304
Machiavelli, 167
Machines, 146, 149, 217, 291
Mac Kay, D. M., 292, 304
McLaughlin, R., 299
Maelzel, 285, 287
Magnus, R., 27
Maingot, Eliane, 304
Malinowski, B., 13
Mand, 25
Manipulation of behavior, 14, 82
Manners, 12

Maps, 83, 123, 160, 190
Marionettes, 263
Marx, Karl, 33, 35, 125, 188
Maslow, Abraham, 167, 304
Matching to sample, 23
Mathematical models, 104
Mather, Cotton, 66
Matter, 247
Maxims, 140, 143, 147, 163
Mayow, John, 281, 304
Mayr, Ernst, 132, 304
Mazes, 94, 161
Meaning, 11, 86, 128, 156, 198, 291
Measurement, 77
Mediated delayed matching, 23
Memoranda, 275
Memorials, 275
Memory, 274
Memory drums, 94
Mendel, G., 190
Mental apparatus, 130, 182
Mentalistic psychology, 11, 266
Mental measurement, 95
Mental processes, 4, 28, 116
Mental states, 236, 239
Michelangelo, 266, 297
Mill, J. S., 188
Miller, S., 27, 28, 108, 304
Mind, 247
Mimicry, 198
Misperception, 20
Mnemonic, 234, 274
Model, 144, 163
Monastic communities, 31
Money, 18

Montaigne, 271
Moods, 236
Moral equivalent of war, 56
More, Thomas, 33, 187
Morgan, Lloyd, 223
Morgan, T. H., 112, 190
Morris, William, 305
Morse, W. H., 305
Motivation, 79
Multiple deprivation, 25
Multiple schedules, 25
Music, 62, 69
Muslem, 61
Mutation, 203
Mystic, 150
National Training School for Boys, 20
Nationalism, 41
Natural selection, 181, 194
Needs, 54, 56, 63f., 182f.
Negley, G., 29, 305
Neisser, Ulrich, 149, 289, 305
Nervous system, 280
Net utility, 177
Neurology, 112
Newell, Allen, 288f., 305
Newman, J. H., 279, 305
Newton, ix, 104, 257, 276
Nicotine, 58
Novelty, 86
Nurture, 199
Obliviscence, 92
Observation, 23
Ontogenic aggression, 210
Ontogeny of behavior, Ch. 7

Operandum, 75
Operant, 131
Operant behavior, 7f., 23, Ch. 5, 109, 143, 175
Operant conditioning, 194, 203
Operant level, 118
Oral reinforcement, 55
Oral stimulation, 50
Orwell, George, 30, 305
Output, 5, 198
Overpopulation, 59
Overweight, 59
Page, Irvine, 295, 305
Paleobehavior, 276
Parallelism, 223
Paranoid behavior, 165
Parrot, 195
Pascal, 150, 171, 174, 177
Passion, 171
Path, 123, 137f., 157
Patrick, J. M., 29, 305
Paul, Saint, 62
Pavlov, 3, 26f., 35, 107, 190
Pavlovian conditioning, 106, 293
Pecking order, 196
Performance, 75, 118, 262
Permissiveness, 16
Personal knowledge, 155, 167
Peterson, N., 128, 187, 305
Pharmacology, 283
Philosopher-king, 31
Philosophy, 96
Phonemes, 11
Phylogenic contingencies, 296
Phylogeny of behavior, Ch. 7

Physiology, 262, 282f.
Piece-rate pay, 19
Pierce, C. S., 170
Plans, 115, 123, 147, 159, 163
Plato, 30ff., 132, 152, 231
Pleasure, 69f.
Plotinus, 33
Plutarch, 184
Poetry, 264
Poker, 122f.
Polanyi, Michael, 155f., 166, 247f., 305
Political science, 96f.
Popper, K. R., 30, 188, 305
Population-limiting instinct, 199
Porpoise, 201
Possession, 271
Premonition, 127
Privacy, 225, 262
Probability of behavior, 75, 80, 91, 117
Probability learning, 162
Probability theory, 145
Problem solving, Ch. 6, 142
Programmed contingencies, 176
Programmed instruction, 15, 176
Programmed phylogenic contingencies, 217
Promise, 153
Proprioception, 226
Prosthetic environment, 16
Protestant ethic, 169
Provenance of behavior, 174
Proverbs, 140
Proximate gains, 169
Proximity seeking, 128
Pryor, Karen, 305
Psychoanalysis, 97

Psycholinguistics, 89f., 278
Psychology, 96
Psychopharmacology, 112, 119
Psychophysics, 86
Psychotherapy, 112
Punch, 247
Punch and Judy, 263
Puppets, 263
Puritanical solution, 52, 62f., 66
Purpose, 105, 125ff., 159, 163, 193, 198, 289
Racial memory, 173
Rate of responding, 7, 77, 94, 109
Rationality, 120, 151, 170
Reaction time, 76
Readers, 263
Real time, 81
Reasoning, 170f., 239
Recall, 77f., 92, 234, 239, 294
Reductionism, 292
Redundancies, 87
Reference, 11, 131, 198
Reflex, 3, 78
Reflex physiology, 131
Reinforcers, 7, 94, 109, 205
Releasers, 4, 175, 201
Religion, 96, 123, 140, 158
Religious communities, 20
Remembering, 76f.
Reminiscence, 92
Renoir, 155
Resolutions, 123, 153, 159, 163
Response differentiation, 23
Responsibility, 128
Ritualization, 180

Rock, Irvin, 305
Rogers, Carl, 167, 305
Romanes, 223
Rorschack, 91
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 32, 35, 104, 285, 305
Royal Society, 32
Rule of thumb, 165
Rule-governed behavior, 121, 150, 160–170, 289
Rules, 13, 39, 90, 124, 143–149, 157ff., 254
Salaman, R. A., 306
Sample space, 117, 122
Santayana, 262
Sartre, 12
Schaffer, H. R., 306
Schedules of reinforcement, 24, 66, 80, 82, 95, 117
Schemata, 83
Schiff, D., 303
Schirer, A. M., 300
Schlaraffenland, 37
Science, 62, 70, 123, 141ff., 163
Scientists, 102, 157, 166
Scores, 94
Sebeok, T. A., 197f., 306
Second-order rules, 144
Seeing, 251
Self, 272
Self-control, 67, 71
Self-knowledge, 194, 294
Self-observation, 143
Sentences, 11
Sequential arrangements of contingencies, 95
Sequential probabilities, 87
Serle, J. L., 303
Sexual behavior, 52, 55, 66, 189, 206

Sexual reinforcement, 50, 60, 67
Sexual seduction, 58
Shakespeare, 253, 258
Shaw, J. C., 288f., 305
Sherrington, 27, 190
Sidman, M., 109, 306
Sign, 198
Significance, 92, 110
Simon, H. A., 288f., 305
Simplification, 102
Simulation, 264
Skeat, 251
Skeletal reflexes, 201
Skinner, B. F., 300, 301, 305, 306, 307
Smoking, 149, 168
Social contingencies, 179, 186
Social relations, 95
Social sciences, 96
Social structure, 198
Socialism, 19
Sociology, 12, 20, 91
Socrates, 291
Solitaire, 69
Sommers, P. van, 235, 303
South Seas, 32f.
Spark of Life, 270
Spark of Mind, 270
Species differences, 190
Species status, 87
Species-specific behavior, 187ff., 201
Specification of behavior, 76
Speech, 88
Speed of forgetting, 92
Speed of learning, 92
Statistics, 81, 110, 113

Stevens, S. S., 227, 307
Stimulus, 3, 7, 78, 86, 94, 106, 142, 175
Stimulus control, 78
Stimulus discrimination, 23
Stimulus-response psychology, 3ff., 25ff., 78
Stretching ratios, 119
Structuralism, 12, 96, 200, 264
Structural linguistics, 12
Sublimation, 68
Suffering, 71
Suicide, 214
Superego, 272
Superstitious behavior, 23, 168, 177, 180
Survival, 46
Survival value, 131
Sybarite, 51, 63
Symbiosis, 186
Symptom, 75
Syntactical rules, 11, 278
Taboos, 69
Tact, 25, 254
Taube, Mortimer, 149, 308
Taylor, Charles, 129, 308
Teaching, 15, 95
Technology of behavior, 95
Teleology, 105
Television, 60
Terminology, 103
Terrace, H. S., 308
Territoriality, 175, 196f.
Textual behavior, 25, 163
Thales, 285
Theory of knowledge, 228
Therapy, 18

Thinking, 125
Thomson, J. J., 112
Thoreau, Henry David, 33
Thorndike, Edward L., 6, 105, 134, 224
Thorpe, W. H., 182, 308
Tinbergen, N., 182, 308
Titchener, E. B., 266
T-maze, 91, 94
Token economies, 16
Tolman, E. C., 7, 28, 161, 308
Topography of behavior, 88, 94, 128
Touch, 250
Traits, 77, 183
Tranquilizers, 53
Trend, 88
Trial, 81, 93, 154
Trial-and-error learning, 134, 203
Tropisms, 3, 173
Ultimate utility, 168f.
Unconscious, 126, 130, 170, 246
UNESCO, 20
Utilitarianism, 5, 9
Utility, 120
Utopia, 22, Ch. 2
Universals, 132
Variable-ratio schedule, 69
Verbal behavior, 11, 100, 109, 163, 197f., 203, 254
Verbal community, 229
Verbal summator, 91
Violence, 52
Vives, Juan Luis, 267, 308
Vocal behavior, 201
Voluptuary, 51
Von Kempelen, 285

Waddington, C. H., 204, 308
Walden Two, 29, 44
War, 59
Warning cry, 194
Warren, H. C., 26, 308
Water divining, 165
Watson, John B., 3f., 172, 224, 262, 265, 308
Way stations, 254
Wealth, 19
Weber, Max, 62
Weiss, J. M., 301
Welles, Orson, 269
Westby, G., 308
White, R. A., 308
Wiener, Norbert, 26
Wiggins, David, 308
Wilde, Oscar, 60
Wilson, E. Bright, xi, 308
Writers, 102, 155
Wundt, W., 266
Wynne-Edwards, V. C., 308
Zoosemiotics, 197

